Translated  by 
Swami  Gambhirananda 


BRAHMA-SIJTRA-  BHASYA 

of 

f  / 

Sri  Sankaracarya 


Translated  by 

Swami  Gambhirananda 

Foreword  by 
Dr.  T.M.P.  Mahadevan 


Tldvaita  Asflrama. 


(  PUBLICATION  DEPARTMENT) 
5DEHI  ENTALLY  ROAD  •  KOLKATA  700  014 


Published  hy 
Svvmnl  Hodhasaranunda 
Adhyaksha,  Advaita  Ashrama 
Mayavati,  Champawat,  Uttarakhand 
from  its  Publication  Department,  Kolkata 
Email :  mail@advaitaashrama.  org 
Website  :  www.advaitaashrama.org 

C  All  Rights  Reserved 
First  Edition,  1965 
Tenth  Impression,  April  2009 
2M2C 

ISBN  978-81-7505-105-8 

Printed  in  India  at 
Trio  Process 
Kolkata  700  014 


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION 


Sri  Sarikaracarya’s  great  commentary  on  the  Brahma-Sutras 
had  been  translated  into  English  twice.  But  the  non-availability 
of  these  translations  or  their  high  price  raised  the  need  for  a 
fresh  dependable  translation  at  a  moderate  price.  The  present 
publication  admirably  meets  this  demand. 

The  translator,  Swami  Gambhirananda,  has  to  his  credit  a 
number  of  publications  of  the  Ramakrishna  Order.  His  latest 
work,  a  translation  of  Sankara’s  commentary  on  eight  principal 
Upani$ads,  published  by  us  five  years  back,  was  well  received 
and  has  been  in  constant  demand  ever  since.  He  completed  the 
translation  of  the  Sutra-Bha$ya  three  years  ago,  but  owing  to 
various  difficulties  we  had  to  postpone  its  publication. 

The  present  publication  has  its  own  special  features.  The 
translator  has  given  the  word-for-word  meaning  of  each  apho¬ 
rism  under  its  Sanskrit  text,  followed  by  a  running  translation, 
with  additional  words  in  brackets  for  clarification.  In  the  trans1 
lation  of  the  commentary,  the  texts  setting  forth  doubts,  the 
opponent’s  views,  objections  on  the  latter,  and  the  Vedantin’s 
answers  have  been  shown  separately,  to  facilitate  easy  compre¬ 
hension.  The  translation  is  generally  based  on  the  Ratnaprabhd , 
though  the  Nyaya-nirnaya  and  the  Bhamatl  have  been  consulted 
occasionally.  Sanskrit  words  have  been  printed  with  diacritical 
marks.  In  quoting  from  the  Upani$ads,  the  translator  has  used 
Swami  Madhavananda’s  translation  of  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upend - 
§ad  and  his  own  translation  of  the  Eight  Upani$ads  referred  to 
above.  The  other  texts  are  translated  afresh.  He  has  also  added 
notes  to  elucidate  difficult  passages.  The  contents  have  been  divid¬ 
ed  topic-wise,  and  an  index  of  sutras  in  Sanskrit  has  been  added 

We  have  made  every  effort  to  make  the  publication  an  attrac¬ 
tive  one,  and  hope  that  it  would  be  welcome  to  all  lovers  of 
Vedanta  philosophy.  A  part  of  its  sale  proceeds  will  be  spent  for 
the  public  library  run  by  us  in  Calcutta. 

Swami  Vivekananda’s  Birthday,  Publisher 

January  23,  1965 


PREFACE  TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION 


This  work  is  being  reprinted  after  seven  years.  Our  thanks  go 
to  the  eminent  Vedantin  Dr.  T.  M.  P.  Mahadevan,  Director, 
Centre  of  Advanced  Study  in  Philosophy,  University  of  Madras 
for  writing  a  valuable  foreword. 

January  26,  1972  Publisher 


FOREWORD 


The  three  basic  texts  of  Vedanta  are  the  Upani$ads,  the 
Bhagavad-glta,  and  the  Brahma-sutra.  Together  they  are  referred 
to  as  the  prasthdna-traya ,  triple  canon  of  Vedanta.  The  Upani$ads 
constitute  the  revealed  texts  {Sruti-prasthdna)\  they  mark  the 
summits  of  the  Veda  which  is  Sruti  (the  heard,  the  revealed). 
They  are  the  pristine  springs  of  Vedantic  metaphysics;  Vedanta 
is  the  name  given  to  them  because  they  are  the  end  (aim  as 
well  as  concluding  parts)  of  the  Veda  (Veda  -f  anta).  The 
Bhagavad-glta  comes  next  only  to  the  Upani$ads.  It  is  given  a 
status  which  is  almost  equal  to  that  of  the  Upani$ads.  As  embody¬ 
ing  the  teachings  of  Sri  Kj^oa,  and  as  constituting  the  cream  of 
the  Epic  Mahdbhdrata ;  the  Bhagavad-glta  occupies  a  unique 
place  in  the  Vedantic  tradition.  A  popular  verse  compares  the 
Upani$ads  to  the  cows,  the  Bhagavad-glta  to  the  milk,  Sri  K?$Qa 
to  the  milkman,  Arjuna,  the  Paodava  hero,  to  the  calf,  and  the 
wise  people  to  the  partakers  of  the  milk.  Sri  SaAkara  describes 
the  Bhagavad-glta  as  the  quintessence  of  the  teaching  of  the 
entire  Veda  (samasta-veddrtha-sdrasangraha-bhtitam) .  As  this 
text  forms  a  part  of  the  Mahdbhdrata  which  is  a  Smfti  (the 
remembered,  i.e.  a  secondary  text  based  on  the  Veda),  it  is  called 
Smrti-prasthdna.  The  third  of  the  canonical  texts  is  the  Brahma- 
sutra  which  is  regarded  as  Nydya-prasthana ,  because  it  sets  forth 
the  teachings  of  Vedanta  in  a  logical  order.  This  work  is  known 
by  other  names  also:  Vedanta-surra,  since  it  is  the  aphoristic  text 
on  Vedanta;  Sdriraka-sutra,  since  it  is  concerned  with  the  nature 
and  destiny  of  the  embodied  soul;  Bhikfu-sutra ,  since  those  who 
are  most  competent  to  study  it  are  the  sannydsins ;  Uttara- 
nnmdmsd-sutra,  since  it  is  an  inquiry  into  the  final  sections  of  the 
Veda. 

The  author  of  the  Brahma-sutra  is  Badarayaoa  whom  Indian 
tradition  identifies  with  Vyasa,  the  arranger  or  compiler  of  the 
Veda.  A  verse  in  the  Bhdmati  which  is  Vacaspati  MiSra’s  com¬ 
mentary  on  Sri  Sankara’s  commentary  on  the  Brahma-sutra, 
describes  Vyasa  as  the  incarnation  of  Vwu’s  cognitive  energy 


VI 


FOREWORD 


(Jndnasakti-avatdra).  In  the  Brahma-sutra,  Badarayaga-Vyasa 
strings  together  the  leading  concepts  of  Vedanta  in  an  ordered 
manner.  The  Sutra  is  an  exquisite  garland  made  out  of  Upani$ad- 
blossoms.  It  is  divided  into  four  chapters  ( adhyayas );  each 
chapter  consists  of  four  parts  ( padas)\  each  part  has  a  number  of 
sections  (adhikaranas) ;  and  each  section  has  one  or  more 
aphorisms  ( sutras ).  According  to  Sankara,  the  number  of  sec¬ 
tions  is  192.  The  total  number  of  aphorisms  is  555. 

In  the  first  chapter  which  is  on  ‘harmony’  ( Samanvaya ), 
Badarayana  teaches  that  the  Vedantic  texts,  taken  as  a  whole, 
have  for  their  purport  Brahman,  the  non-dual  Reality.  Those 
passages  of  the  Upani§ads  where  express  mention  is  made  of 
Brahman  or  Atman  do  not  present  any  difficulty.  But  there  are 
other  passages  in  which  other  terms  are  used — terms  which  do 
not  normaly  mean  Brahman-Atman.  In  such  cases,  the  meaning 
should  be  construed  from  the  context  For  instance,  dkd'sa  means 
‘ether’.  But  in  a  text  where  it  is  stated  that  all  things  come  out  of 
dkasa  and  get  resolved  into  it,  the  expression  dkdsa  obviously 
means  Brahman,  which  is  the  ground  of  the  universe  (B.S.  I.  i. 
22).  Similarly,  in  the  Chandogya  text,  “Which  is  that  deity?  He 
said:  Prana”  (I.  xi.  4-5),  the  term  prana  means  not  the  vital  air, 
but  Brahman,  because  all  beings  are  said  to  merge  in  It  (B.S.  I. 
i.  23).  The  same  is  true  in  regard  to  other  terms  such  as  manas  or 
manomaya .  In  the  Chandogya  text  where  this  term  occurs,  there 
is  the  commencing  statement  “All  this,  indeed,  is  Brahman”  (III. 
xiv.  1-2),  and  also  the  manomaya  is  taught  as  the  object  of 
meditation.  This  can  only  be  Brahman,  and  not  the  individual 
mind  or  soul  (B.S.  I.  ii.  1).  In  all  such  cases,  what  determines 
the  meaning  of  a  term  is  not  the  ordinary  usage,  but  the  context, 
(Prakarandc-ca :  B.S.  I.  ii.  10  ),  and  the  construed  meaning  of  the 
related  texts  (Vdkydnvayat :  B.S.  I.  iv.  19).  Thus  Badarayana 
shows  that  the  Vedantic  texts  harmoniously  teach  Brahman  as 
the  plenary  reality,  the  world-ground  which  is  of  the  nature 
of  existence-consciousness-bliss,  which  is  the  supreme  object  of 
meditation,  and  which  is  the  final  end  to  be  realized. 

In  the  second  chapter  which  is  entitled  ‘non-conflict’ 
( Avirodha ),  Badarayana  discusses  the  objections  that  may  be 
raised  against  the  metaphysics  of  Vedanta.  The  principal  objector 


FOREWORD 


vii 

is  the  follower  of  the  Samkhya  system.  Great  attention  is 
paid  to  the  Samkhya  because  it  comes  very  close  to  Vedanta. 
If  the  Samkhya  view  is  shown  to  be  untenable,  it  follows  that 
the  other  views  which  are  more  remote  are  unacceptable. 
For  instance,  it  is  declared  (B.S.  II.  i.  3)  that  the  view  of  the 
Yoga  of  Patanjali  stands  refuted  when  it  has  been  shown  that  the 
Samkhya  view  is  unsound.  Taking  its  stand  on  logic,  the  Samkhya 
argues  that  Pradhana  or  Prakrti  is  the  cause  of  evolution. 
Employing  the  same  logic,  the  Vedantin  shows  that  Pradhana 
cannot  account  for  the  world-evolution.  There  is  observed  design 
in  the  world.  This  would  be  inexplicable  if  Pradhana  were  to 
be  the  cause.  How  can  the  inert  Pradhana  have  a  sense  of 
design,  or  even  the  will  to  create?  Also,  why  and  how  it  begins 
to  evolve,  and  why  and  how  it  ceases  from  evolving,  it  is  not 
possible  to  say;  for,  since  Pradhana  is  not-intelligcnt,  there  should 
be  either  perpetual  evolution  or  dissolution.  And,  any  intelligent 
purpose  is  out  of  place;  there  would  be  only  a  blind  process  or 
movement  without  an  end  (B.S.  II.  ii.  1-6).  The  Vai£c$ika  system 
traces  the  world  to  primary  atoms,  posits  adrtfa  as  the  unseen 
power  responsible  for  bringing  the  atoms  together  or  for  separat¬ 
ing  them.  This  view  fares  even  worse  than  the  Samkhya  theory. 
Whether  as  located  in  the  atoms  or  in  the  souls,  the  unseen 
potency  cannot  move  the  atoms  because  it  is  unintelligent  even 
as  the  atoms  are.  There  are  other  attendant  defects  in  the  system 
which  cannot  be  remedied.  The  most  serious  of  these  difficulties 
is  that  the  Vaise?ika  believes  that  from  the  partlcss  atoms,  the 
things  of  the  world  with  parts  arise  (B.S.  II.  ii.  11-17).  There 
are  realistic  as  well  as  idealistic  schools  in  Buddhism.  All  things 
are  aggregates,  according  to  Buddhism:  there  is  nothing  like 
substantiality.  For  the  realistic  schools,  there  arc  two  kinds  of 
aggregates,  the  internal  and  the  external.  But,  consistent  with 
the  other  Buddhist  doctrine  of  momentariness,  how  aggregation 
can  take  place  at  all  passes  one’s  understanding.  There  is  a 
processor  of  successive  moments:  but  how  are  the  moments 
related?  What  connection  is  there  between  what  precedes  and 
what  succeeds?  These  questions  remain  unsolved  (B.S.  II.  ii.  18 
ff).  For  the  Buddhist  idealist,  there  is  no  extra-mental  reality; 
ideas  are  things;  what  is  real  is  a  series  of  momentary  ideas.  This 


FOREWORD 


viii 

view  also  is  untenable.  The  appearance  of  ideas  is  sought  to  be 
explained  as  brought  about  by  residual  impression.  But,  how  can 
there  be  residual  impression  if  there  are  no  external  things.  So, 
says  Badarayarja,  the  Buddhist  view  is  totally  unintelligible 
(Sarvatha-anupapattih :  B.S.  II.  ii.  32).  The  Jaina  philosophy 
seeks  to  combine  opposites  such  as  permanence  and  change, 
identity  and  difference.  The  obvious  criticism  of  such  a  view 
would  be:  how  could  one  and  the  same  thing  possess  contradic¬ 
tory  attributes?  There  are  other  doctrines,  too,  of  Jainism  which 
are  unacceptable,  e.g.  that  the  soul  has  variable  size.  And  so,  the 
Jaina  position  has  to  be  rejected  (B.S.  II.  ii.  33  ff). 

According  to  Vedanta,  as  we  have  seen,  Brahman  is  the  world- 
ground,  the  sole  and  whole  cause  of  the  world.  Some  theistic 
schools  do  not  subscribe  to  this  view.  They  hold  that  God  is 
only  the  efficient  cause  who  fashions  the  world  out  of  extraneous 
matter  which  is  co-eternal  with  him.  This  view  is  not  sound, 
because  God  would  then  become  limited  and  finite  (B.S.  II.  ii. 
37);  and  a  limited  God  is  no  God  at  all.  The  world  appears 
from  Brahman,  stays  in  it,  and  gets  resolved  into  it.  This  does 
not  involve  any  effort  on  the  part  of  Brahman.  The  so-called 
creative  activity  is  like  sport  (B.S.  II.  i.  33).  The  milk-tuming- 
into-curds  example  (B.S.  II.  i.  24)  is  useful  for  realizing  that 
there  is  no  need  for  an  external  agency  for  world-appearance, 
that  creation  is  not  production  de  novo.  A  better  analogy  would 
be  to  compare  the  non-evolution  and  evolution  of  the  world 
to  the  folded  and  spread  out  states,  respectively,  of  a  piece  of 
cloth  (B.S.  II.  i.  19).  The  truth  is  that  the  world  is  not  separate 
from  Brahman;  it  has  no  independent  existence.  The  effect  is 
non-different  from  the  cause.  In  other  words,  the  effect  is  appear¬ 
ance,  the  cause  alone  is  real  (B.S.  II.  i.  14). 

What  is  the  status  of  the  individual  soul?  Is  it  a  product  of 
Brahman?  The  view  of  the  Pancaratra  school  that  the  soul  is 
produced  from  God  is  rejected  by  Badarayana.  The  soul  which 
is  eternal  cannot  be  what  is  originated  (B.S.  II.  ii.  42).  The  soul 
is  to  Brahman  as  reflection  is  to  prototype  (B.S.  II.  iii.  50).  It  is 
the  soul  that  is  the  subject  of  transmigration,  the  agent  of  action, 
the  enjoyer  of  the  fruit  of  action,  the  being  that  strives  for 
release  and  eventually  gains  it. 


FOREWORD 


IX 


In  the  third  chapter  of  the  Brahma-sutra,  Badarayana  discusses 
the  means  to  release,  sadhana .  The  Carvaka  view  that  there  is  no 
soul  apart  from  the  body  is  unsound.  If  consciousness  is  an 
attribute  of  the  body,  why  is  it  that  a  dead  body  is  not  con¬ 
scious  (B.S.  III.  iii.  53-54).  So,  one  must  admit  that  the  soul  is 
non-material,  non-physical,  which  does  not  perish  with  the 
decease  of  the  body.  After  physical  death,  the  soul  may  go 
along  either  the  path  of  the  gods  ( devaydna )  or  the  path  of  the 
fathers  ( pitryma ),  carrying  along  with  it  the  subtle  parts  of  the 
elements  and  the  sense-organs,  etc.,  that  had  formed  the  ingredi¬ 
ents  of  its  constitution.  If  the  soul  had  performed  the  appropriate 
meditations,  it  goes  along  the  path  of  the  gods  and  reaches 
Brahma-loka.  If  it  had  done  the  necessary  sacrificial  rites,  it  goes 
along  the  path  of  the  fathers.  There  is  also  a  third  place  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Sastras :  the  souls  that  are  not  fit  to  pursue  either 
of  the  two  paths  referred  to  attain  the  status  of  tiny,  continually 
revolving  creatures  which  are  born  and  which  die  (B.S.  III.  i. 
17).  The  souls  that  are  bound  for  the  other  two  paths  also  except 
in  the  case  of  those  which  have  realized  Sagupa  (Qualified) 
Brahman,  have  to  return  to  the  world  of  mortals,  as  soon  as  their 
merit  is  exhausted.  Similarly,  the  souls  which  go  to  the  nether 
worlds  have  to  come  back  after  their  evil  deeds  h^ve  been 
accounted  for.  The  texts  describe  the  process  by  which  all  this 
happens.  They  give  details  regarding  the  re-entry  of  the  soul 
into  the  mother’s  womb  and  its  re-embodiment.  The  various 
states  through  which  the  embodied  soul  passes  are  also  explained: 
states  such  as  waking,  dream,  and  deep  sleep.  The  migration  of 
the  soul  goes  on  until  it  gets  released  through  the  realization  of 
the  non-dual  Brahman. 

Brahman  in  itself  is  devoid  of  attributes,  devoid  of  any  form 
(Arupavad-eva  hi  tat-pradhanatvdt :  B.S.  III.  ii.  14).  In  some 
passages  of  the  Upani§ads,  it  is  true,  attributes  are  ascribed  to 
Brahman.  But  this  ascription  is  for  the  sake  of  meditation 
(upasana).  Just  as  light  which  has  no  form  appears  to  be  endowed 
with  different  forms  because  of  the  objects  which  it  illumines, 
Brahman  which  has  no  attributes  appears  as  if  endowed  with 
attributes  on  account  of  the  limiting  adjuncts  (B.S.  III.  ii.  15). 
Brahman  is  the  non-dual  pure  consciousness.  It  appears  as  if 


X 


FOREWORD 


many,  even  as  the  one  sun  gets  reflected  diversely  in  the  different 
vessels  containing  water  (B.S.  III.  ii.  18).  When  the  adventitious 
conditions  fall  off,  it  will  be  realized  that  Brahman  is  the  non¬ 
dual  Absolute.  In  itself  it  is  unconditioned  and  unsullied.  In 
order  to  convey  this  truth,  the  Upani$ads  adopt  the  negative 
mode  of  instruction  (B.S.  III.  ii.  22-23):  Brahman  is  “not  thus; 
not  thus”  (Bf.  II.  iii.  6). 

The  soul  is  non-different  from  Brahman.  Because  of  nescience, 
it  imagines  that  it  is  different.  When  nescience  is  removed 
through  knowledge,  the  soul  realizes  the  truth  of  non-difference 
(B.S.  III.  ii.  26).  Scripture  also  denies  difference  (Prati$edhac-ca : 
B.S.  III.  ii.  30).  And  it  prescribes  meditation  known  as  vidyas 
for  enabling  the  soul  to  realize  its  non-difference  from  Brahman. 
The  meditations,  although  many,  have  one  and  the  same  purpose 
(B.S.  III.  iii.  1).  What  the  nature  and  content  of  a  particular 
meditation  are  should  be  determined  carefully  with  reference 
to  the  context  in  which  it  is  taught.  In  two  different  Upani$ads, 
for  instance,  the  name  may  be  the  same,  but  the  meditations  may 
be  different.  In  some  other  cases,  the  names  may  be  different, 
but  the  meditation  may  be  the  same.  In  regard  to  some  medita¬ 
tions,  the  details  may  be  given  in  bits  in  different  places.  The 
sadhaka  must  piece  them  all  together  in  order  to  be  guided  in 
his  practice.  And  it  is  not  necessary  that  one  should  practise  all 
the  Vidyas .  Any  one  of  them  will  be  enough  for  gaining  the  goal 
(B.S.  III.  iii.  59).  The  vidyas  are  meditations  on  the  Sagurn 
Brahman.  Therefore,  the  one  who  practises  them  goes,  after 
death,  along  the  path  of  the  gods,  and  eventually  secures  release 
(B.S.  III.  iii.  29).  It  is  only  the  knower  of  Nirguna  (Non-quali- 
fied)  Brahman  that  does  not  go  along  any  eschatological  path; 
he  attains  Brahman  here. 

Sannyasa  is  a  recognized  dSrama\  it  is  prescribed  even  as  the 
other  three  are.  The  sarmydsins  have  no  need  to  perform  ritual; 
they  are  eligible  to  pursue  the  path  of  knowledge.  They  have 
no  other  obligation  such  as  tending  the  sacred  fires  (B.S.  III.  iv. 
25).  The  sacrificial  rites  are  intended  only  for  those  who  have 
studied  the  Veda  and  are  instructed  in  the  ritual  techniques,  and 
who  have  not  yet  gained  eligibility  for  knowledge.  Works,  when 
performed  with  some  end  in  view,  bring  in  their  respective 


FOREWORD 


xi 


results.  These  results  may  pertain  to  this  world  and  to  the  next. 
But,  when  duties  are  done  without  any  motive  for  fruits,  they 
serve  to  purify  the  mind  and  make  it  fit  for  pursuing  the  path 
of  knowledge.  The  seeker  after  knowledge  must  endeavour  to 
possess  such  virtues  as  calmness,  equanimity,  self-control,  etc. 
(B.S.  III.  iv.  27).  These  virtues  are  necessary  for  turning  the 
mind  inward  in  search  of  the  true  Self.  Endowed  with  the 
cardinal  virtues,  one  follows  the  path  of  knowledge  and  gains 
the  goal  which  is  release,  mok$a  (B.S.  III.  iv.  1).  Mok§a  is  not  a 
post  mortem  state.  It  is  the  eternal  nature  of  the  Self,  and  is 
realized  the  very  moment  the  veil  of  ignorance  is  lifted.  So, 
what  is  required  is  the  removal  of  the  obstacle  that  bars  the  way 
(B.S.  III.  iv.  51).  In  mok§a  itself  there  are  no  differences  of 
grade  or  kind.  What  is  referred  to  as  the  state  of  release  is  nothing 
but  Brahman  (B.S.  III.  iv.  52). 

The  last  chapter  of  the  Brahma-sutra  is  on  ‘the  fruit’,  Phala . 
The  one  who  meditates  on  Saguna  Brahman,  as  was  mentioned 
earlier,  goes  along  the  path  of  the  gods,  after  physical  death, 
carrying  along  with  him  the  subtle  body  which  lasts  till  release 
is  gained  (B.S.  IV.  ii.  8).  The  soul  of  the  one  who  has  realized 
Saguna  Brahman  reaches  the  region  of  the  heart,  and  then  departs 
through  the  susumna-nadi  (B.S.  IV.  ii.  17).  Leaving  the  body, 
the  soul  travels  along  the  rays  of  the  sun,  and  goes  to  Brahma-loka 
(B.S.  IV.  ii.  18).  During  this  journey,  various  deities  take  charge 
of  the  soul,  and  conduct  it  along  the  path  of  the  gods.  After 
reaching  Brahma-loka,  the  soul  gets  identified  with  Saguna 
Brahman.  And,  when  that  loka  is  destroyed  at  the  end  of  the 
kalpa,  the  soul  realizes  Nirguna  Brahman,  which  is  release  (B.S. 
IV.  iii.  10).  As  we  have  already  seen,  the  one  who  follows  the 
path  of  knowledge  gains  release  in  this  very  life.  His  pranas  do 
not  depart;  they  get  resolved  even  here  (B.S.  IV.  ii.  12).  On 
Brahman-realization,  one  is  freed  from  all  sin  (B.S.  IV.  i.  13). 
The  one  who  is  released  in  this  life  is  called  a  Jivan-mukta.  His 
body  continues  till  the  Prdrabdha  lasts.  Prdrabdha  is  the  karma 
which  has  begun  to  fructify  and  is  responsible  for  the  present 
body.  That  the  body  of  the  Jivan-mukta  continues  till  Prdrabdha 
lasts  is  stated  only  from  the  standpoint  of  those  who  are  yet  un¬ 
released.  The  truth  is  that  for  the  mukta  there  is  no  body  at  all. 


FOREWORD 


xii 

The  knower  of  Brahman  realizes  the  absolute  non-difference 
from  Brahman  ( Avibhagah  :  B.S.  IV.  ii.  16).  When  one  has  gained 
release,  there  is  no  more  involvement  in  samsara ,  no  more  return 
to  the  cycle  of  birth  and  death  ( Andvrttih  :  B.S.  IV.  iv.  22). 

We  have  now  had  a  conspectus  of  the  teaching  of  the  Brahma- 
sutra  in  the  light  of  Sankara’s  commentary  thereon.  Sankara’s 
bha$ya  is  the  earliest  extant  commentary  on  Badarayaoa’s  text.  It 
is  celebrated  for  its  lucidity  and  depth  (prasanna-gambhira) . 
There  must  have  been  commentaries  before  Sankara;  but  none 
of  them  has  come  down  to  us.  Several  commentators  came  after 
Sankara.  Among  them  are  Bhaskara,  YadavaprakaSa,  Ramanuja, 
Kesaya  ,  Nllakaotha,  Madhva,  Baladeva,  Vallabha,  and  Vijnana 
Bhik$u.  They  differ  from  Sankara  on  certain  moot  points.  But 
all  of  them  have  been  influenced,  knowingly  or  unknowingly, 
by  Sankara’s  commentary  which  has  served  as  the  model.  In 
the  Sankara  tradition  itself  there  have  appeared  several  commen- 
tarial  works.  On  Sankara’s  bhasya ,  Vacaspati  wrote  the  Bhdmat% 
which  was  followed  by  the  Kalpataru ,  and  the  Farimala.  Simi-. 
larly,  Padmapada  wrote  the  Pancapadikd  on  Sankara’s  bhd$ya\ 
and  this  was  followed  by  the  Vivarana,  and  the  Tattvadipana. 
These  are  but  a  few  of  the  annotations  and  glosses  on  Sankara’s 
great  bha$ya . 

Padmapada,  one  of  the  direct  disciples  of  Sankara  offers  this 
obeisance  to  his  master  and  the  bhasya : 

yadvaktramanasasarah-pratilabdhajanma 
bhasyaravindamakarandarasam  pibanti , 
praty  dsamunmukha-vlnltaviney  abhringa. 

tan  bhdsyavittakagurun  pranato'smi  murdhna. 

“I  bow  my  head  before  Sri  Sankara,  the  preceptor  of  the  humble 
disciples  who  are  renowned  for  their  knowledge  of  the  bhd$ya 
and  who  drink  the  nectar  flowing  from  the  bhasya- lotus  which 
owes  its  origin  to  the  mdnasa-Xzkz  of  Sri  Sankara’s  mouth  and 
who,  like  the  bees,  are  eagerly  lifting  up  their  faces  from  all 
quarters.” 

Appayya  Efik$ita  sings  the  praise  of  the  great  teaching  thus: 


FOREWORD 


xiii 

adhigatabhida  purvacaryanupetya  sahasradha 

saridiva  mahtbhedan  samprapya  sauripadodgata, 
jayati  bhagavatpdda-srnmnmukhambuja-nirgata 
jananaharani  siiktih  brahrmdvayaikapardyana . 

“The  great  teaching  which  issues  from  the  lotus-face  of  the 
Bhagavatpada,  which  has  the  non-dual  Brahman  as  its  primary 
import,  which  destroys  phenomenal  existence  and  which,  while 
admitting  of  several  interpretations  by  the  (numerous)  ancient 
preceptors,  exists  in  all  its  grandeur,"  in  the  same  way  as  the 
river  Ganga  which,  issuing  from  the  foot  of  Vi$gu,  assumes 
different  courses  on  reaching  different  lands.” 

There  are  a  few  English  translations  available  of  the  Brahma- 
sutra  with  Sankara’s  commentary.  The  earliest  to  appear  was  the 
one  by  George  Thibaut.  The  merits  of  the  present  translation 
have  been  pointed  out  in  the  Publisher’s  Preface  to  the  first 
edition.  That  a  second  edition  has  been  called  for  itself  shows 
how  useful  Swami  Gambhiranandaji’s  translation  has  been.  This 
is  a  faithful  and  helpful  rendering  of  a  work  which  is  of  peren¬ 
nial  and  profound  interest.  The  second  edition  will  be  welcomed, 
like  the  first,  by  the  students  of  Vedanta  in  the  English-speaking 
world. 


January  5,  1972 


T.  M.  P.  Mahadevan 

Director ,  Centre  of  Advanced  Study 
in  Philosophy ,  University  of  Madras 


CONTENTS 


Preface 

iii 

Foreword 

V 

List  of  Abbreviations 

xiii 

Key  to  Transliteration  and  Pronunciation 

CHAPTER  I 

SAMANVAYA— RECONCILIATION  THROUGH 
PROPER  INTERPRETATION 


Section  I 


Preamble  1 

Topic 

1.  Deliberation  on  Brahman  6 

2.  Origin  etc.  of  the  Universe  ..  ..  13 

3.  Scripture  as  Source  of  Knowledge  of  Brahman  18 

4.  Upani$ads  Reveal  Brahman  . .  . .  20 

5.  The  First  Cause  Possessed  of  Consciousness  45 

6.  The  Blissful  One  ..  61 

7.  The  Being  Inside  ..  78 

8.  Space  . .  82 

9.  Prana  . .  85 

10.  Light  ..  88 

11.  Pratardana  ..  98 


Section  II 


Topic 

1.  The  Entity  Known  Everywhere  108 

2.  The  Eater  ..  ..  118 

3.  The  Two  in  the  Cavity  of  the  Heart  120 

4.  The  Person  in  the  Eye  . .  126 

5.  The  Internal  Ruler  ..  133 

6.  The  One  That  Is  Unseen  etc.  138 

7.  VaiSvanara  . .  146 


XVI 


CONTENTS 
Section  III 


Topic 


I. 

The  Abode  of  Heaven,  Earth,  etc. 

159 

2. 

Bhuman  (Infinite,  Plenitude) 

167 

3. 

Immutable 

174 

4. 

The  Object  of  Seeing 

177 

5. 

Dahara  (The  Small  Space)  . . 

180 

6. 

Acting  in  Accordance 

198 

7. 

The  Measured  One 

202 

8. 

Gods 

204 

9. 

Pseudo-Sudra  . . 

229 

10. 

Vibration 

234 

11. 

Light  as  Declared  in  the  Upani$ad 

236 

12. 

Space  Is  Brahman,  Being  Different 

from  Name  and  Form 

238 

13. 

Sleep  and  Death 

239 

Section  IV 

Topic 

1. 

The  Inferred  Entity 

243 

2. 

The  Bowl 

259 

3. 

Statement  of  Number 

263 

4. 

Causality 

270 

5. 

Balaki 

276 

6. 

Correlation  of  Passages 

282 

7. 

Brahman  as  Material  Cause  .. 

291 

8. 

Explanation  of  Everything  . . 

296 

CHAPTER  II 

AVIRODHA— NON-CONTRADICTION 
Section  I 

Topic 

1.  Conflict  with  Smrti 


299 


CONTENTS  xvii 

Topic 

2.  Refutation  of  Yoga  . .  305 

3.  Difference  in  Nature  '  . .  307 

4.  Non-acceptance  by  the  Wise  323 

5.  Brahman  Becoming  an  Experiencer  324 

6.  Origin  . .  . .  326 

7.  Non-performance  of  Good  . .  346 

8.  Creation  without  Materials  . .  350 

9.  Wholesale  Transformation  ..  353 

10.  Possession  of  All  Powers  358 

11.  Need  of  Aiotive  360 

12.  Partiality  and  Cruelty  ..  362 

13.  Propriety  of  All  the  Characteristics  366 

Section  II 

Topic 

1.  Samkhya  View  Refuted  . .  367 

2.  Vai$e$ika  Objection  Refuted  383 

3.  Atoms  Not  the  Cause  of  Universe  387 

4.  Refutation  of  Buddhist  Realists  402 

5.  Buddhist  Idealism  Refuted  416 

6.  Jaina  View  Refuted  . .  426 

7.  God  Is  Not  a  Mere  Superintendent  433 

8.  Bhagavata  View  Refuted  439 

Section  III 

Topic 

1.  Origin  of  Space  444 

2.  Origin  of  Air  . .  . .  459 

3.  Origin  of  Brahman  Denied  . .  460 

4.  Origin  of  Fire  . .  . .  461 

5.  Origin  of  Water  464 

6.  Origin  of  Earth  . .  464 

7.  Creation  from  God’s  Deliberation  466 

8.  Reverse  Order  of  Dissolution  467 

9.  The  Origin  of  Mind  and  Intellect  468 


CONTENTS 


xviii 


Topic 

10.  Birth  and  Death  470 

11.  Origin  of  the  Soul  472 

12.  Eternally  Conscious  Soul  476 

13.  Soul’s  Dimensions  478 

14.  Soul  as  Agent  . .  . .  494 

15.  The  Soul  under  Two  Conditions  497 

16.  Soul’s  Agentship  Derived  from  God  503 

17.  Relation  of  Soul  and  God  506 


Section  IV 


Topic 


1. 

Origin  of  the  Pranas 

521 

2. 

Number  of  Pranas 

527 

3. 

Atomic  Pranas  . . 

533 

4. 

Chief  Prana:  Its  Creation 

533 

5. 

Nature  of  Prana 

535 

6.. 

Prana  Is  Atomic 

540 

7. 

Presiding  Deities 

541 

8. 

Prana  and  Pranas 

544 

9. 

Creation  of  Gross  Objects 

547 

CHAPTER  III 

SADHANA— SPIRITUAL  PRACTICE 

Section  I 

Introduction 

553 

Topic 

i. 

Departure  from  the  Body 

554 

2. 

Return  of  the  Souls 

565 

3. 

Fate  of  Evil-doers 

574 

4. 

Similarity  with  Space  etc.  during  Descent 

580 

5. 

Intervening  Period  of  Descent 

582 

6. 

The  Souls  in  Plants  and  Thereafter 

583 

CONTENTS 
Section  II 


XIX 


Topic 

1.  Dream  State  ..  588 

2.  The  Soul  in  Deep  Sleep  . .  597 

3.  The  Same  Soul  Returns  from  Sleep  603 

4.  Soul  in  Swoon  . .  606 

5.  The  Nature  of  Brahman  . .  608 

6.  Unconditioned  Brahman  and  Soul  623 

7.  Brahman  One  without  a  Second  633 

8.  Fruits  of  Action  640 


Section  III 


Topic 

1.  Sameness  of  Meditation  644 

2.  Combination  of  Traits  651 

3.  Difference  of  Meditations  . .  652 

4.  Specification  of  Om  . .  . .  657 

5.  Sameness  of  the  Meditation  on  Praija  . .  660 

6.  Combination  and  Non-combination  of  Attributes  of 

Brahman  . .  ...  662 

7.  Puru$a  as  the  Highest  in  Kafha  665 

8.  The  Supreme  Self  in  Aitareya  667 

9.  Acamana  and  Meditation  on  Praija  673 

10.  Same  Meditation  in  the  Same  Branch  . .  677 

11.  No  Combination  in  Meditation  on  Satya-Brahman  679 

12.  Attributes  of  Brahman  in  Ragayanlya  Not  to  be 

Combined  Elsewhere  . .  . .  682 

13.  Puru$a-Vidya  in  Chandogya  and  Taittirlya  684 

14.  Non-combination  of  Disparate  Traits  ..  687 

15.  Rejection  and  Reception  of  Merit  ..  690 

16.  Discarding  Virtue  and  Vice  at  Death  ..  695 

17.  Paths  of  Those  Who  Know  Or  Do  Not  Know  the 

Qualified  Brahman  . .  . .  697 

18.  The  Path  of  Gods  Is  for  All  Worshippers  of 

Qualified  Brahman  . .  . .  699 

19.  People  with  a  Mission  . .  701 


XX 


CONTENTS 


Topic 

20.  Conceptions  of  the  Immutable  705 

21.  Same  Conception  in  Mumjaka  and  Ka{ha  707 

22.  The  Inmost  Self  in  Bfhadaranyaka  709 

23.  Reciprocity  of  Conceptions  ..  711 

24.  Satya-Brahman  in  Bfhadaranyaka  . .  713 

25.  Combination  of  Traits  in  Bfhadaranyaka  and 

Chandogya  . .  . .  715 

26.  Agnihotra  to  Praoa  ..  ..  717 

27.  Meditations  Connected  with  Rites  Are  Not 

Obligatory  ..  ..  721 

28.  Meditations  on  Praga  and  Vayu  . .  725 

29.  Fires  in  Agni-Rahasya  Not  Parts  of  Sacrifice  730 

30.  The  Self  Distinct  from  Body  ..  739 

31.  Meditations  Connected  with  Accessories  of  Rites  743 

32.  Meditation  on  VaiSvanara  as  a  Whole  746 

33.  When  Meditations  Differ  749 

34.  Alternative  Meditations  ..  751 

35.  Meditations  Yielding  Worldly  Results  753 

36.  Meditations  Based  on  Subsidiaries  754 


Section  IV 


Topic 

1.  Knowledge  not  a  Subsidiary  of  Rites  758 

2.  Sannyasa  Prescribed  by  Scriptures  ..  770 

3.  Injunctions  for  Meditation  Not  Eulogistic  778 

4.  Upani$adic  Stories  . .  . .  780 

5.  Sannyasins  Free  from  Rituals  ..  782 

6.  Rituals  etc.  Needed  for  Knowledge  . .  782 

7.  Restrictions  about  Food  . .  . .  786 

8.  Duties  of  Orders  of  Life  should  be  Fulfilled  789 

9.  Knowledge  for  People  outside  Orders  . .  793 

10.  Defection  from  Monasticism  ..  795 

11.  Expiation  for  Transgression  of  Celibacy  ..  796 

12.  They  are  to  be  Excommunicated  799 

13.  Meditations  Connected  with  Rites  799 

14.  Injunction  about  Meditativeness  801 


CONTENTS  xxi 

Topic 

15.  The  Childlike  State  ..  806 

16.  Time  of  Fruition  of  Knowledge  807 

17.  Liberation  is  Uniform  Everywhere  809 

CHAPTER  IV 
PHALA— RESULT 

Section  I 

Topic 

1.  Repetition  of  Meditations  etc.  812 

2.  Identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  818 

3.  No  Self-identity  with  Symbols  ..  821 

4.  Superimposition  of  the  Higher  on  the  Lower  823 

5.  Subordinate  parts  of  Rites  As  the  Sun  etc.  826 

6.  Meditation  in  a  Sitting  Posture  830 

7.  No  Restriction  of  Place  832 

8.  Meditation  till  Death  ..  ..  833 

9.  Knowledge  Destroys  all  Results  of  Actions  834 

10.  No  Remnant  of  Virtue  Even  ..  837 

11.  Past  Accumulated  Results  are  Destroyed  839 

12.  Agnihotra  etc.  ..  ..  ..  841 

13.  Rites  Unaccompanied  by  Meditation  ..  843 

14.  Experience  of  the  Active  Merit  and  Demerit  845 

Section  II 

Topic 

1.  At  Death  the  Organs  Merge  in  Mind  847 

2.  Mind  Merges  in  Praija  849 

3.  Prapa  Merges  into  the  Soul  . .  851 

4.  Departure  of  the  Enlightened  and  the 

Unenlightened  . .  854 

5.  Relative  Merger  of  Fire  etc.  856 

6.  No  Departure  for  a  Knower  of  Brahman  . .  859 

7.  The  Organs  of  the  Knower  Merge  in  Brahman  862 


XX 11 


CONTENTS 


Topic 

8.  Absolute  Absorption  of  the  Constituents  . .  86} 

9.  Departure  of  one  who  knows  the  Qualified 

Brahman  . .  . .  . .  864 

10.  The  Soul  follows  the  Rays  of  the  Sun  ..  866 

11.  Soul’s  Journey  during  the  Sun’s  Southern  Course  868 

Section  III 

Tapic 

1 .  Only  One  Path  to  the  World  of  Brahman  . .  870 

2.  The  Departing  Soul  Reaches  Air  after  Year  872 

3.  The  Soul  proceeds  from  Lightning  to  Vanina  874 

4.  Guiding  Deities  ..  875 

5.  The  Path  Leads  to  the  Conditioned  Brahman  878 

6.  Worship  with  and  without  Symbols  . .  892 

Section  IV 

Topic 

1.  Nature  of  Freedom  ..  . .  895 

2.  Liberated  Soul  Inseparable  from  Brahman  897 

3.  Characteristics  of  the  Liberated  Soul  899 

4.  Fulfilment  of  Desire  through  Will  901 

5.  Body  after  Reaching  Brahma-loka  903 

6.  Entry  into  many  Bodies  . .  905 

7.  Acquisition  of  Divine  Powers  907 


LIST  OF  ABBREVIATIONS 


Ai. 

Aitareya  Upani$ad 

Ai.  A. 

Aitareya  Aranyaka 

Ai.  Br. 

Aitareya  BrahmaQa 

Ap. 

Apastamba  Dharma-Sutra 

B.S. 

Brahma-Sutra 

Br- 

Bj-hadaraijyaka  Upani$ad 

Ch. 

Chandogya  Upani$ad 

Is. 

Isa  (vasya)  Upani$ad 

J5- 

Jabala  Upani$ad 

Jai.  Su. 

Jaimini-Sutra 

Ka. 

Katha  Upani$ad 

Kau. 

Kau$Itaki  Upani$ad 

Ke. 

Kena  Upani$ad 

Ma. 

Maptjukya  Upani§ad 

Mbh. 

Mahabharata 

Mu. 

Muncjaka  Upani$ad 

N.S. 

Nyaya-Sutra 

Pa.  Su. 

Paoini-Sutra 

Pr. 

Prasna  Upani$ad 

RV. 

Rg-Veda 

S.B. 

Satapatha  Brahmaija 

Sv. 

SvetaSvatara  Upani$ad 

Tai. 

Taittirlya  Upani$ad 

Tai.  A. 

Taittiriya  Araoyaka 

Tai.  Br. 

Taittirlya  Brahmana 

Tai.  S. 

Taittirlya  Saihhita 

Vai.  Su. 

Vaise§ika-Sutra 

KEY  TO  TRANSLITERATION 
AND  PRONUNCIATION 


Sounds  like 


3T 

a 

o  m  son 

an 

a 

a  in  master 

5 

i 

i  in  i/ 

f 

i 

ee  in  feel 

u 

u  in  full 

35 

u 

oo  in  boot 

r 

somewhat  between 

r  and  ri 

e 

a  in  evade 

ai 

y  in  my 

aft 

o 

o  in  oh 

aft 

au 

ow  in  now 

k 

k 

kh 

ckh  in  blockhead 

»T 

g 

g  (hard) 

gh 

gh  in  log-hut 

5 

n 

ng 

c 

ch  (not  k) 

ch 

chh  in  catch  him 

ar 

j 

j 

jh 

dgeh  in  hedgehog 

3T 

n 

n  (somewhat) 

t 

t 

5 

th 

th  in  ant-hill 

Sounds  like 
3T  d  d 

3  dh  dh  in  godhood 

ar  n  n  in  under 

%  t  French  t 

th  th  in  thumb 

5  d  th  in  then 

dh  theh  in  breathe  here 
*T  n  n 

q  p  p 

<?>  ph  ph  in  loop-hole 

ST  b  b 

bh  bh  in  abhor 

^  m  m 

V  y  y 

T  r  r 

V  1  1 

3f  v  v  in  avert 

5T  £  sh 

s  sh  in  jAoh; 

?r  s  s 

5  h  h 

rii  ng 

h  half  h 


CHAPTER  I 


SAMANVAYA— RECONCILIATION  THROUGH 
PROPER  INTERPRETATION 

Section  I 

Preamble  :  It  being  an  established  fact  that  the  object  and 
the  subject,1  that  are  fit  to  be  the  contents  of  the  concepts  “you” 
and  “we”  (respectively),  and  are  by  nature  as  contradictory  as 
light  and  darkness,  cannot  logically  have  any  identity,  it  follows 
that  their  attributes  can  have  it  still  less.2  Accordingly,  the 
superimposition  of  the  object,  referable  through  the  concept 
“you”,  and  its  attributes  on  the  subject  that  is  conscious  by 
nature3  and  is  referable  through  the  concept  “we”  (should  be 
impossible),  and  contrariwise  the  superimposition  of  the  subject 
and  its  attributes  on  the  object  should  be  impossible.  Neverthe¬ 
less,  owing  to  an  absence  of  discrimination  between  these  attrib¬ 
utes,  as  also  between  substances,  which  are  absolutely  disparate, 
there  continues  a  natural  human  behaviour  based  on  self-identifi¬ 
cation  in  the  form  of  “I  am  this”4 *  or  “This  is  mine”.6  This 
behaviour  has  for  its  material  cause  an  unreal  nescience  and  man 
resorts  to  it  by  mixing  up  reality  with  unreality  as  a  result  of 
superimposing6  the  things  themselves  or  their  attributes  on  each 
other. 

1  Non-Self  or  matter,  and  Self  or  Consciousness,  respectively. 

3  The  attribute  of  matter  is  insentience,  and  of  the  Self,  Consciousness. 
These  attributes  cannot  have  any  relation  of  identity  or  non-difference. 

3  Which  witnesses  the  intellect  etc. 

*  For  instance,  “I  am  this  body”,  where  the  body  as  such  is  superimposed 

on  the  Self,  conceived  of  as  “I”.  Or  “This  body  is  I”,  where  a  relationship 
with  the  Self  is  superimposed  on  the  body. 

6  For  instance,  “This  is  my  body”,  where  the  attributes  of  the  body  are 
superimposed  on  the  Self.  In  the  first  case  (previous  f.  n.)  the  separateness 
of  the  body  and  Self  is  forgotten;  in  the  latter  they  are  kept  apart,  but 
the  attributes  get  mixed  up. 

6  The  phrases  “by  mixing  up”  and  “as  a  result  of  superimposing”  mean 


2  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 

If  it  be  asked,  “What  is  it  that  is  called  superimposition?” — 
the  answer  is:  It  is  -an  awareness,  similar  in  nature  to  memory, 
that  arises  on  a  different  (foreign)  basis  as  a  result  of  some  past 
experience.7  With  regard  to  this,  some  say  that  it  consists  in  the 
superimposition  of  the  attributes  of  one  thing  on  another.8  But 
others  assert  that  wherever  a  superimposition  on  anything  occurs, 
there  is  in  evidence  only  a  confusion  arising  from  the  absence  of 
discrimination  between  them.9  Others  say  that  the  superimposi- 

the  same  thing.  The  implied  sequence  points  out  the  chain  constituted  by 
superimposition,  its  impression  on  the  mind,  and  subsequent  superimposi¬ 
tion,  which  succeed  one  another  eternally  like  the  seed  and  its  sprout. 

7  Or  the  interpretation  is:  “It  is  somewhat  like  a  recollected  thing 
emerging  from  the  impression  of  some  past  experience.”  The  two  inter¬ 
pretations  are  from  the  points  of  view  of  subjective  and  objective 
awareness. 

8  Four  alternative  theories  follow  successively.  Of  these  the  first  two 
— Anyathakhyati  and  Atmakhyati — are  comprised  within  the  present 
view.  According  to  Anyathakhyati ,  subscribed  to  by  the  Nyaya- 
Vaisesika  schools,  we  have  at  first  a  vague  awareness  of  “this”  with  regard 
to  the  rope  in  front.  As  the  mind  is  not  satisfied  with  this  alone,  it  craves 
for  a  distinct  perception.  But  some  defect  in  the  cognizer,  his  instruments 
of  perception,  or  environment  debars  this,  at  the  same  time  that  the 
similarity  of  the  rope  and  the  snake  calls  up  the  memory  of  the  latter. 
This  memory  conjures  up  the  visual  perception  of  the  snake,  and  so  the 
“this”  is  apprehended  as  “This  is  a  snake”.  According  to  some  Buddhists 
who  hold  the  Anyathakhyati  theory  of  error,  the  “this”  of  the  externally 
perceivable  rope  is  superimposed  on  the  mentally  present  snake  to  form 
the  erroneous  judgment,  “This  is  a  snake”.  Their  psychological  explana¬ 
tion  is  this:  It  may  so  happen  that  owing- to  the  past  impression  inhering 
in  consciousness,  there  may  be  a  simultaneous  flow  of  the  consciousness 
of  the  external  “this”  and  the  internal  snake,  in  which  case  the  two  get 
mixed  up.  The  Buddhists  call  this  Atmakhyati. 

9  This  view  of  Akhyati  is  held  by  the  followers  of  Prabhakara,  who 
assert  that  there  is  no  such  thing  as  erroneous  knowledge,,  for  a  contrary 
supposition  will  paralyse  human  action  by  raising  doubt  at  every  turn  as 
to  whether  a  particular  cognition  is  valid  or  not.  In  a  case  of  so-called 
error,  we  do  not  really  have  a  single  cognition,  but  two,  though  we  err 
by  failing  to  recognize  the  difference  between  the  two.  On  the  one  side 
we  have  the  knowledge  of  the  “this”  in  its  absoluteness,  occurring  in  the 
judgment  “This  is  nacre”.  The  nacre  fails  to  come  within  the  range  of 
cognition  owing  to  some  defect  in  the  factors  concerned  and  some 
similarity  between  nacre  and  silver,  because  of  which  latter  fact,  the 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA  3 

tion  of  anything  on  any  other  substratum  consists  in  fancying 
some  opposite  attributes  on  that  very  basis.10  From  every  point 
of  view,  however,  there  is  no  difference  as  regards  the  appear¬ 
ance  of  one  thing  as  something  else.  And  in  accord  with  this, 
we  find  in  common  experience  that  the  nacre  appears  as  silver, 
and  a  single  moon  appears  as  two. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  there  be  any  superimposition  of 
any  object  or  its  attributes  on  the  (inmost)  Self  that  is  opposed 
to  the  non-Self11  and  is  never  an  object  (of  the  senses  and 
mind)?  For  everybody  superimposes  something  else  on  what  is 
perceived  by  him  in  front;12  and  you  assert  that  the  Self  is 
opposed  to  the  non-Self  and  is  not  referable  (objectively)  by 
the  concept  “you”. 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  is:  The  Self  is  not  absolutely 
beyond  apprehension,  because  It  is  apprehended  as  the  content 
of  the  concept  “1”;  and  because  the  Self,  opposed  to  the  non- 
Self,  is  well  known  in  the  world13  as  an  immediately  perceived 
(i.e.  self-revealing)  entity.  Nor  is  there  any  rule  that  something 
has  to  be  superimposed  on  something  else'  that  is  directly  per¬ 
ceived  through  the  senses;  for  boys  superimpose  the  ideas  of 
surface  (i.e.  concavity)  and  dirt  on  space  (i.e.  sky)  that  is  not 
an  object  of  sense-perception.  Hence  there  is  nothing  impossible 
in  superimposing  the  non-Self  on  the  Self  that  is  opposed  to  it. 

This  superimposition,  that  is  of  this  nature,  is  considered  by 
the  learned  to  be  avidya,  nescience.14  And  the  ascertainment  of 

contact  between  the  eyes  and  the  nacre  calls  up  to  memory  the  silver 
seen  in  a  shop.  But  the  silver  is  remembered  not  in  association  with  its 
time  and  locality,  but  simply  as  silver.  So  the  two  cognitions  of  “this”  and 
silver  synchronize,  at  the  same  time  that  their  difference  is  not  appre¬ 
hended.  This  non-perception  of  difference  prompts  certain  reactions  in  the 
perceiver. 

10  This  view  of  Asatkhyati  is  held  by  the  Buddhist  Nihilist,  according 
to  whom,  the  non-existing  silver  appears  on  the  non-existing  nacre. 

11  Pratyak-atma  is  interpreted  by  Ratnaprabha  as  that  (Existence- 
Knowledge-Bliss  Brahman)  which  stands  opposed  to  non-existence,  insenti¬ 
ence,  and  sorrow  (i.e.  sorrowful  ego  etc.). 

18  As  an  object,  directly  perceived  through  the  senses. 

13  The  Self  is  known  as  “I”  to  all  people,  learned  or  ignorant,  and 
nobody  has  any  doubt  as  to  this. 

“Since  it  is  a  product  of  nescience  and  is  sublated  by  vidya  (illumina- 


4  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 

the  nature  of  the  real  entity  by  separating  the  superimposed 
thing  from  it  is  called  vidya  (illumination).  This  being  so,15 
whenever  there  is  a  superimposition  of  one  thing  on  another, 
the  locus  is  not  affected  in  any  way  either  by  the  merits  or 
demerits  of  the  thing  superimposed.  All  forms  of  worldly  and 
Vedic  behaviour  that  are  connected  with  valid  means  of 
knowledge  and  objects  of  knowledge  start  by  taking  for  granted 
this  mutual  superimposition  of  the  Self  and  non-Self,  known  as 
nescience;  and  so  do  all  the  scriptures  dealing  with  injunction, 
prohibition,  or  emancipation. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  the  means  of  valid  knowledge, 
such  as  direct  perception  as  well  as  the  scriptures,  have  as  their 
locus  a  cognizer  who  is  subject  to  nescience?16 

The  (  V edantvrts)  answer  is:  Since  a  man  without  self-identifica¬ 
tion  with  the  body,  mind,  senses,  etc.,  cannot  become  a  cognizer, 
and  as  such,  the  means  of  knowledge  cannot  function  for  him; 
since  perception  and  other  activities  (of  a  man)  are  not  possible 
without  accepting  the  senses  etc.  (as  his  own);  since  the  senses 
cannot  function  without  (the  body  as)  a  basis;  since  nobody 
engages  in  any  activity  with  a  body  that  has  not  the  idea  of 
the  Self  superimposed  on  it;  since  the  unrelated  Self  cannot 
become  a  cognizer  unless  there  are  all  these  (mutual  superim¬ 
position  of  the  Self  and  the  body  and  their  attributes  on  each 
other);  and  since  the  means  of  knowledge  cannot  function 
unless  there  is  a  cogmzership;  therefore  it  follows  that  the 
means  of  knowledge,  such  as  direct  perception  as  well  as  the 
scriptures,  must  have  a  man  as  their  locus  who  is  subject  to 
nescience. 

Moreover,  there  is  no  difference  (of  the  learned)  from  the 
animals  (in  regard  to  empirical  behaviour).  Just  as  animals  and 

tion).  The  commentary  refers  to  superimposition,  which  is  a  product  of 
Maya,  rather  than  to  Maya  itself,  because  the  latter  is  a  source  of  evil  in 
its  derived  forms  and  not  in  its  unevolved  states,  e.g.  sleep,  whereas 
superimposition  is  directly  so. 

“Since  superimposition  is  a  product  of  nescience. 

“If  the  Self,  with  the  superimposition  of  “I”  on  It,  be  subject  to  igno¬ 
rance,  then  the  instruments  of  knowledge  and  scriptures,  depending  on  It, 
become  vitiated  and  lose  their  validity. 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  5 

others  turn  away  from  sound  etc.  when  these  appear  to  be 
unfavourable  after  their  ears  etc.  come  in  contact  with  them, 
and  they  move  towards  these  when  they  are  favourable;  and 
just  as  by  noticing  a  man  approaching  them  with  a  raised  stick, 
they  begin  to  run  away  thinking,  “This  one  wants  to  hurt  me”, 
and  they  approach  another  carrying  green  grass  in  his  hands, 
similarly  even  the  wise  are  repelled  by  the  presence  of  strong, 
uproarious  people  with  evil  looks  and  upraised  swords,  and  are 
attracted  by  men  of  opposite  nature.  Therefore  the  behaviour 
of  men  with  regard  to  the  means  and  objects  of  knowledge  is 
similar  to  that  of  animals.  And  it  is  a  familiar  fact  that  the 
animals  use  their  means  of  perception  etc.  without  discrimina¬ 
tion  (between  the  body  and  the  Self).  From  this  fact  of 
similarity,  the  conclusion  can  be  drawn  that  so  far  as  empirical 
behaviour  is  concerned,  the  use  of  the  means  of  perception  by 
the  wise  is  similar  to  that  of  lower  animals,  (it  being  a  result 
of  superimposition).  Of  course,  it  is  a  fact  that  a  man  acting 
intelligently  does  not  acquire  the  competence  for  scriptural 
duties  unless  he  has  a  knowledge  of  the  relationship  of  his  soul 
with  the  next  world.  Still  (a  knowledge  of)  the  absolute  Reality, 
that  is  the  Self,  is  not  a  prerequisite  for  such  a  competence; 
for  It  (i.e.  Reality)  has  no  relevance  here,  and  It  is  opposed  to 
such  competence,17  inasmuch  as  It  is  beyond  hunger  and  thirst, 
free  from  such  differentiation  as  Brahmaija,  K$atriya,  *etc.,  and 
is  not  subject  to  birth  and  death.  And  the  scriptures,  which  are 
operative  before  the  dawn  of  the  real  knowledge  of  the  Self, 
cannot  transgress  the  limits  of  their  dependence  on  people 
groping  in  ignorance.  To  illustrate  the  point:  Such  scriptural 
injunction  as  “A  Brahmaija  shall  perform  a  sacrifice”  can 
become  effective  only  by  taking  for  granted  various  kinds  of 
superimposition  of  caste,  stage  of  life,  age,  condition,  etc.  And 
we  said  that  superimposition  means  the  cognition  of  something 
as  some  other  thing.  Thus  in  accordance  as  one’s  wife,  children, 
or  other  relatives  are  hale  and  hearty  with  all  their  limbs  intact, 

17  For  empirical  activities,  a  vague  idea  about  one’s  soul  is  quite  enough, 
and  no  knowledge  of  the  absolute  Self  is  needed.  On  the  contrary,  when 
one  knows  the  absolute  Self,  one  loses  all  kinds  of  self-identification,  and 
therefore  actions  become  impossible. 


6  BRAHMA- SuTRA -BHASYA  [I.i.l 

or  as  they  suffer  from  the  loss  of  those  limbs,  one  thinks,  “I 
myself  am  hale  and  hearty”  or  “I  myself  am  injured”;  thus  one 
superimposes  external  characteristics  on  the  Self.  Similarly  one 
superimposes  the  characteristics  of  the  body  when  one  has 
such  ideas  as  “I  am  fat”,  “I  am  thin”,  “I  am  fair”,  “I  stay”, 
“I  go”,  or  “I  scale”.  So  also  one  superimposes  the  attributes 
of  the  senses  and  organs  when  one  thinks,  “I  am  dumb”,  “I 
have  lost  one  eye”,  “I  am  a  eunuch”,  “I  am  deaf”,  or  “I  am 
blind”.  Similarly  one  superimposes  the  attributes  of  the  internal 
organ,  such  as  desire,  will,  doubt,  perseverance,  etc.  In  the  same 
way,  one  first  superimposes  the  internal  organ,  possessed  of  the 
idea  of  ego,  on  the  Self,  the  witness  of  all  the  manifestations  of 
that  organ;  then  by  an  opposite  process,  one  superimposes  on 
the  internal  organ  etc.  that  Self  which  is  opposed  to  the  non- 
Self  and  which  is  the  witness  of  everything.  Thus  occurs  this 
superimposition  that  has  neither  beginning  nor  end  but  flows 
on  eternally,  that  appears  as  the  manifested  universe  and  its 
apprehension,  that  conjures  up  agentship  and  enjoyership,  and 
that  is  perceived  by  all  persons.  In  order  to  eradicate  this  source 
of  evil  and  in  order  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  the  unity  of 
the  Self,  is  begun  a  discussion  (after  the  study)  of  all  the 
Upanisads.  We  shall  show  in  this  discussion  about  the  nature 
of  the  embodied  soul,  that  this  is  the  purport  of  all  the 
Upanisads. 


Topic  1  :  Deliberation  on  Brahman 

This  is  the  first  aphorism  in  the  scripture  which  deals  with  the 
ascertainment  of  the  meaning  of  the  Upanisads  and  which  is 
sought  to  be  explained  by  us. 

ii  ?  ii 

Thereafter  3RT:  hence  ^r-fanfRTT  a  deliberation  on  Brahman. 

1.  Hence  (is  to  be  undertaken )  thereafter  a  deliberation  on 
Brahman . 

The  word  atha  (thereafter)  is  used  in  the  sense  of  “sequence”, 
and  not  “commencement”;  for  brahma-jijmsa  is  not  a  thing 


I.  i.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  7 

that  can  be  commenced.18  And  the  meaning  “auspiciousness” 
cannot  enter  syntactically  into  the  purport  of  a  sentence. 
Besides,  the  word  atha ,  even  when  used  in  some  other  sense, 
serves  the  purpose  of  auspiciousness  from  the  very  fact  of  its 
being  heard.10  If  it  implies  the  anticipation  of  something  coming 
later  by  something  broached  earlier,  then  this  does  not  differ  in 
effect  from  causality20  (i.e.  sequence). 

The  meaning  of  “sequence”  being  taken  for  granted,  one  has 
to  mention  that  earlier  thing  which  is  a  prerequisite  for  a 
deliberation  on  Brahman,  just  as  much  as  a  deliberation  on  reli¬ 
gious  rites  (or  deeds)  depends  invariably  on  an  earlier  study 
of  the  Vedas.  The  mere  fact  of  the  study  of  the  Vedas  cannot 
be  the  prerequisite  sought  for  here,  since  this  is  a  common  factor 
(in  both  the  cases  of  deliberation  on  Brahman  and  religious 
rites). 

Opponent :  A  previous  understanding  of  the  religious  rites 
can  be  accepted  here  as  the  special  factor  (leading  to  the  deli¬ 
beration  on  Brahman). 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  since  it  is  logically  possible  for  a  man  who 
has  studied  the  Upanisads  to  undertake  a  deliberation  on 
Brahman  even  without  deliberation  on  the  religious  rites.  And 
no  sequence  is  meant  here  between  these  two  like  the  procedural 
arrangement  in  the  matter  of  taking  up  the  heart  etc.,  where 
an  order  is  sought  to  be  enjoined;21  for  there  is  no  proof  either 


“  Brahma-jijnasa  literally  means  a  wish  to  know  Brahman.  A  wish  follows 
spontaneously  from  the  knowledge  that  something  is  achievable  by  effort, 
and  that  when  achieved,  it  will  lead  to  desirable  results.  Thus  a  wish 
cannot  be  begun  like  a  pot,  for  instance.  So  by  implication  the  phrase 
means  “a  deliberation  on  (the  nature  of)  Brahman”;  and  to  complete  the 
sentence,  we  have  to  supply  “is  to  be  undertaken”.  According  to  this 
interpretation  also,  atha  cannot  mean  commencement,  that  idea  being 
implied  in  the  verb  itself  that  has  to  be  supplied  (f.  n.  26). 

19  Like  the  auspicious  sound  of  a  conch. 

20  Purva-prakrta-apek^d  may  mean  the  broaching  of  a  later  topic  by 
presupposing  something  broached  earlier,  as  for  instance  in  enumeration. 
But  this  meaning  is  inadmissible,  since  nothing  is  broached  before  this 
aphorism.  Or  it  may  mean  the  anticipation  of  a  later  factor  by  the  former. 
But  in  that  case  we  come  to  causality. 

21  The  w'ord  avadana  means  the  cutting  off  of  a  limb  of  the  sacrificial 


8 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[Li.l 


establishing  any  relation  between  these  two  like  that  between 
the  whole  and  its  parts,  or  showing  any  derivative  competence 
(i.e.  competence  in  one  thing  derived  from  the  competence 
in  something  else).22  Moreover,  the  deliberations  on  virtuous 
deeds23  and  Brahman  differ  as  regards  results  and  objects  of 
inquiry.  Virtuous  deeds  have  secular  prosperity  as  their  results; 
and  these  depend  on  the  performance  (of  some  rites  etc.).  But 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  has  emancipation  as  its  result,  and  it 
does  not  depend  on  any  other  performance.  Besides,  a  virtuous 
deed  that  has  to  be  inquired  into  is  a  thing  still  to  be  accom¬ 
plished,  and  it  is  not  present  at  the  time  of  its  acquaintance 
(from  scriptures  etc.),  for- it  has  to  depend  on  human  effort  for 
its  emergence.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Brahman  to  be  inquired 
into  here  is  a  pre-existing  entity;  and  It  is  not  dependent  on 
human  effort,  since  It  is  eternally  present.  Besides,  there  is  a 
difference  in  the  mental  reactions  aroused  by  the  Vedic  texts 
(in  both  the  cases).  The  Vedic  texts  imparting  knowledge  about 
virtuous  deeds  make  their  purport  clear  to  people  while 
engaging  their  attention  to  the  deeds  enjoined,24  whereas  the 

animal  for  offering  as  an  oblation.  Annotators  interpret  it  as  “taking  up”. 
The  text  is:  Hrdayasya  agre  avadyati  atha  jibvayah  atha  vaksasah .  Now 
these  limbs  cannot  be  taken  up  simultaneously;  and  so  an  order  has  to  be 
followed,  which  is  made  clear  by  the  text  by  using  the  word  atha  in  the 
sense  of  “then”. 

21 Sesiii  is  the  whole  (or  principle)  and  sesa  a  part  (or  subsidiary).  The 
two  deliberations  are  not  related  that  way;  nor  is  there  any  derivative 
competence,  as  when  a  man  becomes  competent  to  perform  the  Soma 
sacrifice  by  virtue  of  his  having  performed  the  Darsa-Purnamasa  sacrifice. 
The  performer  of  the  sacrifice  is  the  same  person  where  either  of  these  two 
relations  is  in  evidence.  But  as  both  these  are  ruled  out  here,  the  persons 
undertaking  the  two  kinds  of  deliberation  can  well  be  different. 

23  “A  deed  is  held  to  be  dharma  that  has  no  association  with  undesirable 
consequence  even  from  the  standpoint  of  its  result,  it  being  the  cause  of 
bliss  alone”  ( Sloka-vartika ,  I.i.2,  268-269). 

“An  injunction  gives  rise  to  its  meaning  in  the  mind  of  a  hearer,  which 
leads  the  hearer  to  think  first,  “This  text  wants  me  to  act  in  a  certain 
way”,  and  then,  “I  should  act  in  a  certain  way  in  accordance  with  this 
injunction”,  the  second  thought  being  prompted  by  a  desire  for  the  result 
(e.g.  heaven).  Then  he  learns  about  the  form  of  the  rites  leading  to  the 
result,  as  also  their  instruments,  accessories,  subsidiary  acts,  etc.  Thus 


I.  i.  l  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  9 

Vedic  texts  speaking  of  Brahman  give  rise  only  to  Its  knowledge. 
Since  knowledge  is  not  a  product  of  injunctions,  a  man  is  not 
impelled  to  know,  just  as  for  instance,  he  is  not  in  his  acquisition 
of  knowledge  through  a  contact  of  the  eye  with  some  object.25 

Therefore  something  has  to  be  pointed  out  as  the  prerequisite 
after  which  it  is  taught  that  the  deliberation  on  Brahman  can 
proceed. 

The  answer  is:  They  are  discrimination  between  the  eternal 
and  the  non-eternal;  dispassion  for  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits 
(of  work)  here  and  hereafter;  a  perfection  of  such  practices  as 
control  of  the  mind,  control  of  the  senses  and  organs,  etc.;  and  a 
hankering  for  liberation.  Granted  the  existence  of  these, 
Brahman  can  be  deliberated  on  or  knowm  even  before  or  after 
an  inquiry  into  virtuous  deeds,  but  not  otherwise.  Therefore  by 
the  word  atha  is  enjoined  the  succession  to  a  perfection  of  the 
practices  mentioned  here. 

The  word  atah  (hence)  implies  causality.  Since  in  such  texts 
as,  “To  illustrate  the  point,  just  as  the  enjoyable  things  earned 
through  work  get  exhausted  in  this  world,  so  also  do  the 
enjoyable  things  in  the  other  world  that  are  earned  through 
merit”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  6),  the  Vedas  reveal  that  the  Agnihotra 
sacrifice  etc.,  which  are  the  means  for  the  achievement  of  higher 
things,  have  evanescent  results;  and  since  in  such  texts  as,  “The 
knower  of  Brahman  attains  the  Highest”  (Tai.  II.  i),  the  Vedas 
show  in  a  similar  way  that  from  the  realization  of  Brahman 
follows  the  highest  human  objective  (viz  liberation),  therefore 
one  should  undertake  a  deliberation  on  Brahman  after  a  perfec¬ 
tion  of  the  practices  mentioned  earlier. 

Brahma-jijnasa  means  a  deliberation  on  Brahman.26  And 
Brahman  is  that  which  will  be  defined  hereafter  as  “That  from 

from  the  two  kinds  of  thought  follows  the  knowledge  about  the  virtuous 
deeds,  and  then  action. 

“Just  as  we  see  through  our  eyes,  so  also  we  know  Brahman  through 
such  Vedic  texts  as,  “This  Self  is  Brahman”  (Ma.  2).  Vedic  texts  are  thus 
valid  means  of  knowledge  just  like  direct  perception. 

*°The  literal  meaning  is  “wish  to  know  Brahman”;  but  by  implication, 
the  meaning  is,  “for  getting  a  direct  knowledge  of  Brahman  one  should 
undertake  a  deliberation  on  the  Upanisadic  texts”.  “Wish”  figuratively 


10  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.l 

which  the  universe  has  its  birth  etc.”  (B.  S.  I.  i.  2).  Hence  there 
should  be  no  misinterpretation  of  the  word  in  the  sense  of  the 
Brahmaija  caste  etc.  The  sixth  case-ending  occurring  after 
Brahman  (when  the  compound  is  split  up)  is  used  in  the 
accusative  sense,  and  not  in  the  sense  of  mere  relation;  for  a 
wish  to  know  presupposes  a  thing  wanted  to  be  known,27  and 
no  other  thing  to  be  inquired  into  has  been  indicated. 

Opponent :  Even  if  the  sixth  case-ending  be  taken  in  the  sense 
of  relation,  it  does  not  rule  out  the  fact  of  Brahman’s  being 
the  object  of  deliberation,  for  a  general  relation  includes  all 
special  relations  (e.g.  of  an  object  to  its  verb). 

Vedantin :  Even  then  it  involves  a  useless  effort  to  give  up 
Brahman  as  a  direct  object  and  fancy  It  to  be  so  through  a 
general  relationship. 

Opponent :  Not  useless,  because  it  is  sought  to  imply  thereby 
that  a  deliberation  on  everything  associated  with  Brahman  is 
kept  in  view. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  because  when  the  chief  factor  is  taken  in 
hand,  the  subsidiaries  present  themselves  by  implication.28  Since 
Brahman  is  the  object  most  desired  to  be  comprehended  through 
knowledge,29  It  must  be  the  chief  factor.  When  that  chief  factor 
is  taken  up  as  the  object  of  deliberation,  all  other  factors, 
without  an  inquiry  into  which  the  deliberation  on  Brahman 
remains  unaccomplished,  become  implied  pari  passu ;  and  hence 

means  “the  deliberation  resulting  from  the  wish’,•,  “knowledge”  means 
“the  special  kind  of  direct  knowledge”;  and  the  verb  “is  to  be  undertaken” 
has  to  be  supplied. 

27 Both  the  verbs  “wish  (or  want)”  and  “know”  are  transitive  and  must 
have  objects.  Wish  has  knowledge  for  its  object,  and  knowledge  has 
Brahman.  A  man  must  first  know  something  in  order  that  he  may  wish 
for  it  so  that  knowledge  becomes  both  a  cause  and  an  effect  of  wish. 
The  difficulty  is  obviated  by  saying  that  the  causal  knowledge  is  an  unripe 
and  indirect  apprehension,  whereas  the  resulting  knowledge  is  a  mature 
one  culminating  in  the  revelation  of  Brahman  (f.  n.  30). 

28  Arthapatti,  a  means  of  valid  knowledge,  as  for  instance,  “Plump  Deva- 
datta  does  not  eat  in  the  day-time”,  where  by  implication  we  know  that 
he  eats  at  night. 

"An  object  is  “that  which  is  the  most  desired  (in  a  sentence)  by  the 
subject  of  the  verb”. 


I.  i.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  1 1 

they  need  not  be  mentioned  separately  as  the  import  of  this 
aphorism.  This  is  just  like  saying,  “There  goes  the  king”,  where 
from  that  very  statement  it  follows  that  the  king  is  going  with 
his  retinue.  And  this  has  to  be  accepted  in  order  that  it  may 
accord  with  the  Vedic  texts.  The  Vedic  text  starting  with, 
“That  from  which  these  beings  take  birth,  (that  by  which  they 
are  sustained  after  birth,  and  that  towards  which  they  proceed 
and  into  which  they  get  merged)”,  directly  reveals  Brahman 
as  an  object  (of  deliberation)  by  saying,  “Wish  to  know  that, 
that  is  Brahman”  (Tai.  III.  i).  And  that  Upani§adic  text  will  be 
in  line  with  the  aphorism  if  the  sixth  case-ending  is  interpreted 
in  the  accusative  sense.  Accordingly,  the  sixth  case-ending  is 
used  in  the  accusative  sense. 

Jijnasa  means  “a  wish  to  know”.  And  the  knowledge  culmi¬ 
nating  in  direct  realization30  (of  Brahman)  is  the  object  of 
“wish”  implied  by  the  suffix  san  (in  jijnasa) ;  for  a  desire  aims 
at  its  result,  the  desire  being  that  Brahman  be  realized  (i.e. 
uncovered)  by  that  knowledge31  which  is  a  valid  means  of 
apprehension.  And  the  realization  of  Brahman  is  the  highest 
human  objective;  for  it  completely  eradicates  all  such  evils  as 
ignorance  etc.  that  constitute  the  seed  of  transmigration.  There¬ 
fore  Brahman  should  be  deliberated  on. 

Opponent :  Is  that  Brahman,  again,  familiar  or  unfamiliar?  If 
It  be  familiar,  It  need  not  be  deliberated  on  for  the  sake  of 
knowledge.  Again,  if  It  be  unfamiliar,  It  cannot  be  deliberated 
on. 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  is:  As  to  that,  Brahman  does 
exist  as  a  well-known  entity— eternal,  pure,  intelligent,  free  by 
nature,  and  all-knowing  and  all-powerful.  For  from  the  very 
derivation  of  the  word  Brahman,  the  ideas  of  eternality,  purity, 


30  An  apparent  knowledge  of  Brahman,  that  one  gathers  from  the  scrip¬ 
tures  etc.  and  entertains  as  a  common-sense  point  of  view,  is  the  cause 
of  the  deliberation  on  Brahman;  and  the  resulting  realization  of  the 
form  “I  am  Brahman”  is  the  effect  or  aim  of  that  deliberation.  Thus 
mediate  and  immediate  knowledge  can  be  the  cause  and  effect  of  the 
deliberation. 

81  An  unanalysable  mental  modification  that  expresses  itself  as  a  direct 
awareness  of  the  form,  “I  am  Brahman” 


12 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


etc.  become  obvious,  this  being  in  accord  with  the  root 
brrith .32  Besides,  the  existence  of  Brahman  is  well  known  from 
the  fact  of  Its  being  the  Self  of  all;  for  everyone  feels  that  his 
Self  exists,  and  he  never  feels,  “I  do  not  exist”.  Had  there  been 
no  general  recognition  of  the  existence  of  the  Self,  everyone 
would  have  felt,  “I  do  not  exist”.  And  that  Self  is  Brahman.88 

Opponent :  If  Brahman  be  well  known  in  the  world  as  the 
Self,  then  It  being  already  known,  there  arises  the  difficulty 
again  that  It  is  not  to  be  deliberated  on. 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  there  is  a  conflict  about  Its  distinctive 
nature.  Ordinary  people  as  well  as  the  materialists  of  the 
Lokayata  school  recognize  the  body  alone  to  be  the  Self 
possessed  of  sentience.  Others  hold  that  the  mind  is  the  Self. 
Some  say  that  it  is  merely  momentary  consciousness.  Others  say 
that  it  is  a  void.  Still  others  believe  that  there  is  a  soul,  separate 
from  the  body,  which  transmigrates  and  is  the  agent  (of  work) 
and  the  experiencer  (of  results).  Some  say  that  the  soul  is  a 
mere  experiencer34  and  not  an  agent.  Some  say  that  there  is  a 
God  who  is  different  from  this  soul  and  is  all-knowing  and 
all-powerful;  others  say  that  He  is  the  Self  of  the  experiencing 
individual.  Thus  there  are  many  who  follow  opposite  views  by 
depending  on  logic,  texts  and  their  semblances.  If  one  accepts 
any  one  of  these  views  without  examination,  one  is  liable  to  be 
deflected  from  emancipation  and  come  to  grief.  Therefore35 

“The  root  brmh  means  growth,  and  the  suffix  man ,  added  to 
it,  signifies  an  absence  of  limitation  (in  expanse).  So  Brahman  derivatively 
means  that  which  is  absolutely  the  greatest.  And  eternality  etc.  follow 
as  a  matter  of  course  from  this  limitlessness. 

33  As  is  known  from  the  text,  “This  Self  is  Brahman”  (Br.  II.  v.  19). 

MBhoga  and  Bhoktd  are  generally  translated  as  enjoyment  and  enjoyer. 
But  the  terms  are  meant  to  include  both  enjoyment  and  suffering  of 
happiness  and  sorrow;  hence  experience  and  experiencer  are  nearer  the 
mark. 

“The  deliberation  based  on  the  Upanisads  can  be  commenced  (a) 
since  from  the  fact  of  the  universality  of  bondage  it  follows  that  there 
can  be  such  a  result  as  freedom,  as  also  such  a  subject-matter  as  the  unity 
of  the  individual  Self  and  Brahman;  (b)  since  the  subject-matter  of  this 
book  is  not  included  in  a  deliberation  on  Dharma\  (c)  since  a  class  of 
specially  qualified  persons  can  exist;  (d)  and  since  the  general  familiarity 
with  Brahman  supplies  a  subject-matter  etc.  for  the  book. 


I.  i.  2  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  1 3 

starting  with  the  presentation  of  a  deliberation  on  Brahman, 
here  is  commenced  an  ascertainment  of  the  meaning  of  the  texts 
of  the  Upani$ads  with  the  help  of  reasoning  not  opposed  to  the 
Upani$ads  themselves,  for  the  purpose  of  leading  to  emancipation 
(through  knowledge). 

Topic  2  :  Origin  etc.  of  the  universe 

Opponent :  It  has  been  said  that  Brahman  is  to  be  deliberated 
on.  What,  again,  can  be  the  definition  of  that  Brahman?36 

Vedantin  :  Hence  the  venerable  aphorjst  says: 

II  \  II 

(That)  from  which  (are  derived)  birth  etc.  3^*1 

of  this  (universe). 

2.  That  (is  Brahman)  from  which  (are  derived )  the  birth  etc. 
of  this  (universe). 

Janmadi  can  be  split  up  thus:  That  of  which  janma ,  birth,  is 
the  adi,  first.  In  the  phrase  janmadi  we  have  that  class  of 
Bahuvrihi  compound  where  the  subject  presented  is  appre- 
hended  along  with  its  attributes.37  The  compound  implies  birth, 
continuance,  and  dissolution.  The  mention  of  birth  first  is  in 
accord  with  the  statements  in  the  Vedic  texts  and  the  nature 
of  things.  The  Vedic  assertion  is  this:  “That  from  which  these 
beings  take  birth”  (Tai.  III.  i)  where  origin,  continuance,  and 
dissolution  are  revealed  in  an  order.  As  for  the  nature  of  things, 
a  thing  that  has  come  to  exist  through  birth  can  have  continu¬ 
ance  and  disintegration.  By  the  word  id  am  (this),  occurring  as 
a  constituent  of  the  word  asya  (of  this),  is  indicated  the  entity 
(viz  the  universe)  that  is  presented  immediately  by  perception 
etc.  And  the  sixth  case-ending  (i.e.  “of”)  in  ft  is  meant  for 
indicating  the  relation  of  that  entity  with  birth  etc.  By  the 

“Brahman  has  no  definition  and  hence  cannot  be  deliberated  on. 

37  In  “ pitambaram  posy  a — see  the  man  with  a  yellow  cloth”,  the  man  is 
known  along  with  his  yellow  cloth.  But  in  “ drstasamudram  anaya — bring 
the  man  who  saw  the  sea”,  the  man  alone  can  be  brought,  but  not  the 
qualifying  clause. 


14 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[I.i.2 


word  yatah  (from  which)  is  indicated  a  cause;  and  the  clause 
“that  is  Brahman”  has  to  be  added  at  the  end  to  complete  the 
sentence.  (So  the  meaning  of  the  whole  aphorism  is):  That 
ominiscient  and  omnipotent  source  must  be  Brahman  from 
which  occur  the  birth,  continuance,  and  dissolution  of  this 
universe  that  is  manifested  through  name  and  form,  that  is 
associated  with  diverse  agents  and  experiences,  that  provides 
the  support  for  actions  and  results,  having  well-regulated  space, 
time,  and  causation,  and  that  defies  all  thoughts  about  the  real 
nature  of  its  creation. 

Birth,  continuance,  and  dissolution  only  are  mentioned  here, 
since  the  other  modifications  that  things  are  heir  to  are  included 
in  them.38  Had  the  six  modifications  listed  by  Yaska  in  the 
words,  “It  originates,  exists,  grows,”  etc.  been  accepted  (here), 
it  might  lead  to  the  doubt  that  the  origin,  existence,  and  destruc¬ 
tion  of  the  universe  from  the  primary  source  (Brahman)  are 
not  referred  to,  these  modifications  being  possible  only  during 
the  continuance  of  the  universe.39  In  order  that  this  doubt  may 
not  arise,  the  origin  that  takes  place  from  Brahman,  and  the 
continuance  and  merger  that  occur  in  That  Itself  are  referred  to. 

Apart  from  God,  possessed  of  the  qualifications  already  men¬ 
tioned,  the  universe,  as  described,  cannot  possibly  be  thought  of 
as  having  its  origin  etc.  from  any  other  factor,  e.g.  Pradhana 
(primordial  Nature)  which  is  insentient,  or  from  atoms,  or  non¬ 
existence,  or  some  soul  under  worldly  conditions  (viz  Hiraiiya- 
garbha).  Nor  can  it  originate  spontaneously;  for  in  this  universe, 
people  (desirous  of  products)  have  to  depend  on  specific  space, 
time,  and  causation.40  Those  who  stand  by  God  as  the  cause 


38  The  other  modifications  are:  Growth,  transformation,  and  decay. 
Growth  and  transformation  are  really  forms  of  new  birth  (or  evolution), 
while  decay  is  a  form  of  death. 

30  Yaska’s  Nirukta  mentions  six  kinds  of  modification — birth,  continuance, 
growth,  transformation,  decay,  death.  The  aphorism,  however,  enumerates 
the  three  mentioned  in  the  Upanisads,  so  as  not  to  get  involved  in  any 
other  philosophy. 

40  The  naturalists  cannot  argue  that  a  thing  originates  by  itself,  for  that 
is  a  fallacious  use  of  the  term  “originate”.  A  thing  cannot  originate 
causelessly,  for  that  contradicts  experience. 


I.  i.  2  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  15 

(e.g.  the  Naiyayikas)  rely  on  this  very  inference  alone41  for 
establishing  the  existence  etc.42  of  God  as  distinguished  from 
a  transmigrating  soul. 

Opponent :  Is  not  this  very  inference  presented  here  by  the 
aphorism  starting  with,  “That  from  which”  etc.? 

Vedantin  :  No;  for  the  aphorisms  are  meant  for  stringing 
together  the  flowers  of  the  sentences  of  the  Upani§ads;  for  it  is 
precisely  the  sentences  of  the  Upanisads  that  are  referred  to 
and  discussed  in  these  aphorisms.  The  realization  of  Brahman 
results  from  the  firm  conviction43  arising  from  the  deliberation 
on  the  (Vedic)  texts  and  their  meanings,44  but  not  from  other 
means  of  knowledge  like  inference  etc.  When,  however,  there 
are  Upani$adic  texts  speaking  of  the  origin  etc.  of  the  world, 
then  even  inference,  not  running  counter  to  the  Upani$adic 
texts,  is  not  ruled  out  in  so  far  as  it  is  adopted  as  a  valid  means 
of  knowledge  reinforcing  these  texts;  for  the  Upanisads  them¬ 
selves  accept  reasoning  as  a  help.  For  instance,  there  is  the  text, 
“(The  Self  is)  to  be  heard  of,  to  be  reflected  on”45  (Bj\  II.  iv.  5). 
And  the  text,  “A  man,  well-informed  and  intelligent,  can  reach 
the  country  of  the  Gandharas;  similarly  in  this  world,,  a  man 
who  has  a  teacher  attains  knowledge”46  (Ch.  VI.  xiv.  2),  shows 
that  the  Vedic  texts  rely  on  the  intelligence  of  man. 

So  far  as  the  deliberation  on  Brahman  is  concerned,  the  direct 

41  The  inference  presented  in  the  earlier  sentence — “Apart  from . . .  any 
other  factor.” 

43  Omniscience,  omnipotence,  etc. 

43  Ascertainment  of  the  true  meaning  and  the  possibility  of  the  thing  to 
be  known. 

"When  properly  considered,  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  seen  to  point 
to  Brahman. 

45  Its  possibility  is  to  be  established  through  reasoning. 

4flA  man,  led  away  from  the  Gandhara  country  by  robbers,  with  his 
eyes  covered,  is  left  in  a  forest,  bound  hands  and  feet.  Some  passerby 
then  takes  pity  on  him,  frees  him,  and  tells  him  of  the  road  to  Gandhara. 
If  he  is  intelligent  enough  ( pandita )  to  understand  that  instruction,  and 
if  he  can  use  his  deliberative  faculty  to  guard  against  false  steps,  he  can 
reach  Gandhara.  Similar  is  the  case  of  a  man  under  ignorance  in  this 
world  that  is  like  a  forest.  A  teacher  tells  him,  “You  are  Brahman.”  If  he 
is  intelligent  enough  to  understand  that  and  uses  his  reasoning  faculty 
adequately,  he  reaches  Brahman. 


16  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.  2 

texts,  indicatory  marks,  etc.  are  not  the  sole  means  of  the  valid 
knowledge  of  Brahman,  as  they  are  when  religious  duties  are 
deliberated  on.  But  in  the  former  case,  the  Vedic  texts,  personal 
experience,47  etc.  are  the  valid  means  as  far  as  possible;  for  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  culminates  in  experience,48  and  it  relates 
to  an  existing  entity.  Since  in  the  case  of  rites  etc.  that  have  to 
be  undertaken,  there  is  no  dependence  on  direct  experience  (the 
rite  etc.  being  still  in  the  womb  of  futurity),  the  direct  texts  etc. 
alone  are  authoritative  here.  Besides,  an  act  to  be  performed 
becomes  what  it  is  through  human  effort.  Worldly  or  Vedic 
activities  may  or  may  not  be  undertaken,  or  they  may  be  dealt 
with  otherwise;  as  for  instance,  a  man  can  walk,  ride,  proceed 
otherwise,  or  need  not  move  at  all.  Similarly  (there  are  the 
passages):  “In  the  sacrifice  (with  Soma  juice)  called  Atiratra, 
the  vessel  (containing  the  Soma  juice)  called  §o<JasI  is  taken  up” 
and  “In  the  Atiratra  sacrifice  the  §o<Ja£l  is  not  taken  up”(Tai.S. 
VI.  vi.  2.4).  “(In  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice)  the  oblation  is  offered 
before  sunrise”,  and  “The  oblation  is  offered  after  sunrise”. 
These  injunctions  and  prohibitions  are  meaningful  here  (in  a 
context  of  rites),  as  also  are  the  alternatives,  general  rules,  and 
exceptions.  But  a  thing  cannot  be  judged  diversely  to  be  of  such 
a  kind  and  not  to  be  of  such  a  kind,  to  be  existent  and  non¬ 
existent  (simultaneously).  Options  depend  on  human  notions, 
whereas  the  valid  knowledge  of  the  true  nature  of  a  thing  is  not 
dependent  on  human  notions.  On  what  does  it  depend  then?  It  is 
dependent  on  the  thing  itself.  For  an  awareness  of  the  form,  “This 
is  a  stump,  or  a  man,  or  something  else”,  with  regard  to  the  same 
stump  cannot  be  valid  knowledge.  In  such  a  case  the  awareness 
of  the  form,  “This  is  a  man  or  something  else”  is  erroneous,  but 

47  The  meaning  of  a  particular  passage  has  to  be  determined  with  the 
help  of  direct  assertion,  indicatory  mark,  syntactical  connection,  context, 
position,  and  designation.  The  above  six  means,  as  also  reasoning,  etc., 
determine  the  meanings  of  Vedic  passages  about  Brahman,  and  through 
the  individual  competence  of  each  test,  they  give  rise  to  a  particular 
mental  state  that  is  of  the  nature  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  That 
state  again  destroys  ignorance  and  culminates  in  the  revelation  of  Brahman. 

"The  mental  modification  having  the  form,  “I  am  Brahman”,  culmin¬ 
ates  in  the  revelation  of  the  real  nature  of  Brahman. 


I.i. 2  ]  BRAHMA  - SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  17 

“This  is  a  stump  to  be  sure”  is  valid  knowledge;  for  it  corre¬ 
sponds  to  the  thing  itself.  Thus  the  validity  of  the  knowledge  of 
an  existing  thing  is  determined  by  the  thing  itself.  This  being 
the  position,  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  also  must  be  determined 
by  the  thing  itself,  since  it  is  concerned  with  an  existing  reality. 

Opponent :  If  Brahman  be  an  existing  reality,  It  must  be  the 
object  of  other  means  of  valid  knowledge,  so  that  any  delibera¬ 
tion  on  the  Upani$adic  texts  (for  the  knowledge  of  Brahman) 
becomes  meaningless. 

Vedantin :  Not  so;  for  Brahman’s  relation  with  anything 
cannot  be  grasped,  It  being  outside  the  range  of  sense-percep¬ 
tion.  The  senses  naturally  comprehend  objects,  and  not  Brahman. 
Had  Brahman  been  an  object  of  sense-perception,  knowledge 
would  have  been  of  the  form,  “This  product  is  related  to  (i.e. 
produced  by)  Brahman.”49  Again,  even  when  the  mere  effect 
(i.e.  universe)  is  cognized,  one  cannot  ascertain  whether  it  is 
related  to  Brahman  (as  its  cause)  or  to  something  else.  Therefore 
the  aphorism,  “That  from  which”  etc.,  is  not  meant  to  present 
an  inference. 

For  what  is  it  then? 

For  presenting  an  Upani§adic  text. 

Which,  again,  is  that  Upani§adic  text  that  is  sought  to  be 
referred  to  by  the  aphorism? 

(It  is  this):  Starting  with,  “Bhrgu,  the  well-known  son  of 
Varuna  approached  his  father  Varuna  with  the  request,  ‘O 
revered  sir,  teach  me  Brahman’,”  the  Taittirlya  Upani§ad  states, 
“Seek  to  know  that  from  which  all  these  beings  take  birth,  that 
by  which  they  live  after  being  born,  that  towards  which 
they  proceed  and  into  which  they  merge;  that  is  Brahman” 
(Tai.  III.  i).  And  the  answer  settling  the  question  is:  “From 
Bliss  certainly  all  these  beings  originate;  they  live  by  Bliss  after 
being  born;  and  towards  Bliss  they  proceed,  and  into  Bliss  they 


49  The  inference  of  the  opponent  may  be  either,  “Whatever  is  an  effect 
is  a  product  of  Brahman”  or  “Whatever  is  an  effect  has  a  cause”,  from 
either  of  which  he  may  try  to  arrive  at  the  existence  of  Brahman.  But 
no  such  general  idea,  as  implied  in  the  first  statement,  is  possible  with 
regard  to  Brahman,  since  Brahman  is  imperceptible. 


2 


18 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[  I.  i.  2 


get  merged”  (Tai.  III.  vi).  Other  texts60  too  of  the  same  class 
are  to  be  quoted  (in  this  connection),  which  speak  of  a  cause 
that  is  by  nature  eternal,  pure,  and  free,  and  intrinsically 
omniscient. 

Topic  3  :  Scripture  as  Source  of  Knowledge  of  Brahman 

In  the  course  of  showing  that  Brahman  is  the  source  of  the 
universe,  it  was  implied  in  passing  that  Brahman  is  omniscient. 
By  way  of  confirming  this,  the  aphorist  says: 


Because  of  being  the  source  of  the  scriptures. 

5.  (Brahman  is  omniscient)  because  of  (Its)  being  the  source 
of  the  scriptures . 

Brahman  is  the  yoni  (i.e.  the  material  and  efficient  cause)  of 
great  scriptures  ( sastras )  like  the  Rg-Veda  etc.  which  are  sup¬ 
plemented  by  other  scriptures51  that  are  themselves  sources  (of 
various  kinds)  of  knowledge,  which  reveal  all  things  like  a  lamp, 
and  which  are  almost  omniscient.52  For  scriptures  like  the  Rg- 
Veda,  possessed  of  all  good  qualities  as  they  are,  cannot  possibly 
emerge  from  any  source  other  than  an  all-knowing  One.  For  it  is 
a  well-recognized  fact  in  the  world  that  the  person  from  whom 

60  For  instance,  Mu.  I.  i.  10,  Br.  III.  ix.  28,  etc. 

The  first  aphorism  presents  the  deliberation  on  Brahman  as  a  task  to 
be  undertaken  by  a  competent  person;  and  for  him  the  second  aphorism 
presents  the  definition  of  Brahman.  That  this  is  the  purpose  of  the 
aphorism  becomes  obvious  from  the  order  followed  in  the  Taittirlya 
Upanisad,  where  Bhrgu  comes  as  an  inquirer  and  to  him  Brahman  is 
presented  as  the  cause  of  the  origin  etc.  of  the  universe.  This  is  a 
tatastha  definition  of  Brahman,  where  the  characteristics  mentioned  are 
not  an  intrinsic  part  of  the  thing  defined,  though  they  distinguish  it  from 
others  for  the  time  being.  The  svarupa  definition  is  presented  in  such 
sentences  as,  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”  (Tai.  II.  i),  where 
the  words  Truth  etc.,  though  generally  meaning  empirical  truth  etc.,  imply 
here  by  a  figure  of  speech  a  transcendental  entity  which  is  Truth  Itself. 

“Works  on  mythology,  logic,  discussion  on  religious  and  social  duties, 
sikfa,  kalpa ,  vydkarana,  nirukta ,  chandah ,  jyotis. 

“Not  fully  omniscient,  being  within  Maya. 


I.  i.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  19 

the  scriptures  dealing  with  multifarious  subjects  emerge  is  more 
well  informed  than  the  scriptures  themselves;  for  instance, 
grammar  etc.,  emanating  from  Panini  and  others,  represent 
merely  a  part  of  the  subject  known  to  them.  It  goes  without 
saying  that,  that  great  Being  has  absolute  omniscience  and  omnip¬ 
otence,  since  from  Him  emerge  the  Rg-Veda  etc. — divided 
into  many  branches  and  constituting  the  source  of  classification 
into  gods,  animals,  men,  castes,  stages  of  life,  etc.,  and  the  source 
of  all  kinds  of  knowledge — and  since  the  emergence  of  these 
Vedas  from  that  Being  occurs  as  though  in  sport  and  without 
any  effort  like  the  breath  of  a  man,  as  is  stated  in  the  Vedic 
text,  “Those  that  are  called  the  Rg-Veda,  (Yajur-Veda,  etc.) 
are  but  the  exhalation  of  this  great  Being  (Br.  II.  iv.  10). 

Or  the  aphorism  means: 

Since  the  scriptures  are  Its  valid  means  (of 

knowledge). 

3 .  (Brahman  is  not  known  from  any  other  source )>  since  the 
scriptures  are  the  valid  means  of  Its  knowledge . 

The  scriptures,  viz  the  Rg-Veda  etc.,  just  enumerated,  are  the 
valid  means  of  knowing  ( yoni )  the  real  nature  of  this  Brahman. 
The  idea  implied  is  that  Brahman  is  known  as  the  source  of 
birth  etc.  of  this  universe  from  the  scriptures  alone  that  are  a 
valid  means  of  knowledge.  The  scriptural  text,  “That  from 
which  all  these  beings  take  birth”  etc.  (Tai.  III.  i)  was  quoted 
under  the  previous  aphorism. 

Opponent :  What  need  is  there  again  of  this  aphorism,  since 
by  quoting  such  scriptural  texts  under  the  previous  aphorism 
itself,  it  was  shown  that  Brahman  is  to  be  known  from  the 
scriptures? 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin )  is:  Since  the  scriptures  were 
not  explicitly  alluded  to  by  the  previous  aphorism,  it  might  be 
suspected  that  an  inference  alone  had  been  presented  (as  the 
means  of  knowing  Brahman)  by  the  previous  aphorism,  “That 
from  which”  etc.  (B.  S.  I.  i.  1).  In  order  to  eliminate  that  doubt, 
this  aphorism  says,  “(Brahman  is  not  known  through  any  other 


20  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  I.  i.  3 

means),  since  the  scriptures  are  the  valid  means  of  Its 
knowledge.” 

Topic  4:  Upani$ads  Reveal  Brahman 

Opponent :  How  is  it  again  asserted  that  Brahman  has  the 
scriptures  alone  as  Its  valid  means  of  knowledge?  For  in  (the 
aphorism  of  Jaimini),  “Since  the  Vedas  are  meant  to  enjoin 
action,  those  portions  of  them  which  have  not  this  purpose  in 
view  are  useless”  (I.  ii.  1),  it  has  been  shown  that  the  scriptures 
are  concerned  with  action.  Therefore  the  Upani$ads  are  useless, 
as  they  do  not  enjoin  action.  Or  they  may  form  part  of  an 
injunction  about  action  by  way  of  revealing  the  agent,  the  deity, 
etc.  of  that  action;  or  they  may  be  meant  for  enjoining  some 
other  kind  of  action  such  as  meditation  (on  gods  and  others). 
For  there  is  no  possibility  of  the  Upani$ads  being  the  valid  means 
of  knowing  a  thing  already  in  existence,  since  an  existing  thing 
is  known  through  direct  perception  etc.53  And  just  because  no 
human  objective  is  gained  through  the  revelation  of  something 
that  is  neither  acceptable  nor  rejectable,  it  has  been  said,  “Since 
the  corroborative  statements  ( Arthavada )54  can  be  combined 
with  some  injunction  to  form  a  single  idea,  they  become  a  valid 
means  of  knowledge  (of  virtuous  deeds)  by  way  of  eulogizing 
the  (duties  enjoined  by  the)  injunctions”  (Jai.  Su.  I.  ii.  7).  This 
has  been  stated  thus,  so  that  such  sentences  as  “He  wept”(Tai.S. 

“The  validity  of  a  means  of  knowledge  consists  in  its  revealing  some¬ 
thing  that  is  not  known  through  other  means  and  is  not  sublated  later. 
If  a  thing  known  through  perception  etc.  is  again  revealed  by  the  Upa- 
nisads,  the  latter  lose  their  validity.  “A  thing  already  in  existence”  means 
some  positive  thing  which  is  an  established  reality,  and  as  such,  it  has 
no  connection  with  any  fresh  effort  for  production.  An  action  is  needed 
for  producing  something,  but  not  after  it  is  already  there. 

“This  is  of  three  kinds — (a)  Gunavada ,  attributive  corroborative  state¬ 
ment,  e.g.  “The  sun  becomes  the  sacrificial  stake”  T3  B.  II.  i.  5.2),  where 
the  statement  contradicts  experience  and  is  taken  to  mean  “a  stake  shining 
like  the  sun”;  (b)  Anuvada,  reassertive  corroborative  statement,  e.g.  “Fire 
is  the  remedy  for  cold”,  which  is  a  mere  restatement  of  a  known  fact; 
(c)  Bhutarthavada ,  factual  corroborative  statement,  e.g.  “Indra  raised  his 
thunder-bolt  against  Vrtra”,  which  fact  is  known  from  the  Vedas  only. 
Arthavada  is  also  classified  as  expressing  eulogy,  condemnation,  heroic 
performance,  and  past  incident. 


I.i.4] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


21 


II.  v.  11)  may  not  become  meaningless,  but  may  serve  some 
purpose  by  way  of  eulogizing.  As  for  the  mantras  such  as  “l$e 
tva ”  (T.  S.  I.i.  1)  etc.  they  have  been  shown  to  be  connected 
with  action  by  virtue  of  their  speaking  about  some  duty  or  its 
means.  Nowhere  is  a  Vedic  sentence  seen  to  serve  any  purpose 
without  some  connection  with  an  injunction,  nor  can  it  reasonably 
do  so.  Moreover,  an  injunction  is  not  possible  with  regard  to 
something  already  accomplished,  for  an  injunction  is  concerned 
with  action.  Therefore  the  Upani$ads  become  supplementary  to 
injunctions  by  revealing  the  nature  of  the  agents  and  the  deities 
needed  in  some  action.55  Or  if  this  be  not  accepted  out  of 
fear  of  ignoring  the  context,50  still  the  Upani$ads  may  relate  to 
the  meditations  expressed  by  their  own  texts.  Hence  Brahman 
is  not  (validly)  presented  (as  an  object  of  knowledge)  by  the 
scriptures. 

This  contingency  having  arisen,  the  answer  is  being  given: 

^  ||  *  II 

r[  But  ^  that  Brahman  being  the  object  of  full 

import. 

4.  But  that  Brahman  (is  known  from  the  Upanisads)y  (It) 
being  the  object  of  their  fullest  import. 

The  word  tu  (but)  is  meant  to  rule  out  the  opponent’s  point 
of  view.  Tat  (That)  means  Brahman,  which  is  omniscient  and 
omnipotent,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  origin,  existence,  and  dis¬ 
solution  of  the  universe,  and  which  is  known  as  such  from  the 
Upani$ads  alone. 

How? 

Samavvaydt y  because  of  being  the  object  of  their  fullest 
import;  for  in  all  the  Upani$ads  the  texts  become  fully 
reconciled  when  they  are  accepted  as  establishing  this  very 
fact  in  their  fullest  import.  (As  for  instance):  “O  amiable 


“This  is  the  view  of  Kumarila  Bhatta. 

“The  portion  of  the  Vedas,  presenting  the  unity  of  the  Self  and 
Brahman,  is  different  from  the  portion  presenting  rites  etc. 


22  BRAHMA- SUTRA -BHA§YA  [Li.  4 

one,  this  universe,  before  its  creation,  was  but  Existence, 
one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  “Before  creation 
this  universe  was  but  the  Self  that  is  one”  (Ai.  I.  i.  1), 
“That  Brahman  is  without  prior  or  posterior,  without  interior 
or  exterior  (i.e.  homogeneous  and  without  a  second).  This  Self, 
the  perceiver  of  everything,  is  Brahman”  (Bp.  II.  v.  19),  “All  that 
is  in  front  is  Brahman,  the  immortal”  (Mu,  II.  ii.  11),  etc.  Besides, 
when  the  words  in  the  Upani$adic  sentences  become  fully  ascer¬ 
tained  as  but  revealing  the  nature  of  Brahman,  it  is  not  proper 
to  fancy  some  other  meaning;  for  that  will  result  in  rejecting 
something  established  by  the  Vedas  and  accepting  some  other 
thing  not  intended  by  them.  And  it  cannot  be  held  that  those 
words  have  for  their  ultimate  purpose  only  a  delineation  of  the 
nature  of  the  agent  (viz  the  performer  of  the  rites),  for  there 
are  such  Vedic  texts  as  “(But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman 
everything  has  become  the  Self)  then . . .  what  should  one  see 
and  through  what?”  (Br.  II.  iv.  14),  which  deny  action,  instru¬ 
ment,  and  result.  Nor  is  Brahman  an  object  of  perception,  even 
though  It  stands  as  an  established,  positive  entity,  for  the  unity 
of  the  Self  and  Brahman,  as  stated  in  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7),  cannot  be  known  otherwise  than  from  the  scriptural 
texts.  As  for  the  objection  that  instruction  about  Brahman  is 
useless  inasmuch  as  It  is  neither  acceptable  nor  rejectable,  that  is 
nothing  damaging;  for  the  attainment  of  the  highest  human  goal 
(of  freedom)  becomes  an  accomplished  fact  only  when  the  total 
eradication  of  all  sorrows  comes  about  as  a  result  of  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  Self  as  Brahman  beyond  acceptance  and  rejection.  As 
for  the  presentation  of  the  deities  etc.  for  the  sake  of  meditation 
contained  in  the  Upani$adic  texts  themselves,  that  raises  no 
difficulty.57  (The  absolute)  Brahman  cannot  even  in  that  way 
become  a  factor  in  any  injunction  about  meditation;  for  when 

67  For  the  purification  and  concentration  of  mind,  for  emancipation  by 
stages,  and  for  the  attainment  of  the  respective  results,  the  Upanisads 
speak  in  some  contexts  of  such  deities  as  Prana,  qualified  Brahman,  as 
well  as  of  the  subsidiary  factors  and  the  results  of  such  meditations.  But 
that  does  not  mean  that  the  Upanisads  are  concerned  with  these  alone. 
As  a  mattep  of  fact,  their  main  concern  is  to  reveal  the  unity  of  the 
Self  and  Brahman. 


I.i.  4]  BRAHMA- SCTRA-BHASYA  23 

unity  is  achieved,  it  is  but  reasonable  that  all  ideas  of  duality, 
involving  action,  accessories,  etc.,  should  be  eradicated,  because 
(the  absolute)  Brahman  is  neither  acceptable  nor  rejectable.  Not 
that  the  perception  of  duality  can  crop  up  again  (from  past 
impressions)  even  after  being  (wholly)  uprooted  by  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  non-duality.  If  that  were  a  possibility,  then  alone  could 
it  be  shown  that  Brahman  becomes  involved  in  any  injunction 
about  meditation.  Although  Vedic  texts  are  not  seen  elsewhere 
to  have  any  validity  without  being  construed  with  injunction, 
still  in  the  face  of  the  fact  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  does 
culminate  in  its  result  (viz  emancipation),  the  validity  of  the 
scriptures  dealing  with  the  means  of  that  emancipation  cannot 
be  set  aside.58  Nor  is  the  validity  of  the  Upani$ads  to  be  estab¬ 
lished  by  inference,  in  which  case  alone  it  would  have  been 
necessary  to  cite  analogous  cases.59  Therefore  it  is  proved  that 
Brahman  is  known  from  the  scriptures  alone. 

Others  (e.g.  Vfttikara)  stand  up  here  in  opposition  (and  say): 
Though  Brahman  is  known  from  scriptures  alone,  still  It  is 
presented  as  a  factor  involved  in  the  injunction  about  meditation, 
just  like  the  sacrificial  stake  and  the  Ahavanlya  fire,  which 
though  unknown  in  ordinary  life,  are  presented  by  the  scriptures 
as  factors  in  injunctions.  How  can  this  be  so?60  (This  can  be 
so)  because  the  scriptures  have  in  view  either  persuasion  for 
or  dissuasion  from  activities,  as  is  declared  by  those  who  know 
the  import  of  the  scriptures:  “The  obvious  purport  of  the 
Vedas  is  to  generate  knowledge  about  duties”  ( $abara-Bha$ya , 
I.  i.  1);  “By  injunction  is  meant  a  sentence  impelling  one  to 
duty  (ibid.  I.  i.  2);  “An  instruction  (i.e.  an  injunctive  sentence 
like  ‘He  shall  sacrifice’)  is  that  which  imparts  the  knowledge  of 
these  (virtuous  deeds)”  (Jai.  SO.  I.  i.  5);  “There  (in  the  Vedas) 
words  standing  for  established  realities  should  be  uttered  with 

“So  far  as  their  own  purport,  viz  Brahman,  is  concerned. 

“In  illustration  of  a  universal  proposition  from  which  the  inference 
follows.  The  Vedas,  perception,  inference,  etc.  are  valid  means  of 
knowledge,  each  within  its  own  domain;  none  of  these  need  depend  on 
another  for  proving  its  validity  within  that  domain. 

“How  can  Brahman  become  a  factor  in  an  injunction  about  medita¬ 
tion? 


24 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[I.i.4 


verbal  terminations  etc.”  (ibid.  I.  i.  25);  “Since  the  Vedas  are 
meant  for  enjoining  duties,  all  (the  sentences)  that  do  not  have 
that  purport  are  meaningless”  (ibid.  I.  ii.  1).  Therefore  the 
scriptures  become  meaningful  by  either  persuading  a  person  to 
act  for  a  particular  object  or  dissuading  him  from  action  for 
some  other;  other  sentences  (e.g.  Arthavada)  have  their  useful¬ 
ness  as  forming  parts  of  these.  And  since  the  Upani$adic  texts 
have  a  similarity  with  those  Vedic  texts,  they  should  be  pur¬ 
poseful  in  that  way  alone.  It  being  granted  that  the  Upani$adic 
sentences  have  injunctions  in  view,  it  stands  to  reason  that  just 
as  such  means  as  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  are  enjoined  for  one 
who  desires  heaven,  so  also  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is 
enjoined  for  one  who  hankers  after  immortality. 

Objection  :  Has  it  not  been  pointed  out  that  here  (in  the 
Purva  and  Uttara  Mimarhsas)  there  is  a  difference  of  the  objects 
inquired  into?  In  the  section  dealing  with  rites  etc.,  the  things 
to  be  inquired  into  are  the  religious  acts  that  have  still  to  emerge 
into  being,  but  here  (in  the  section  on  knowledge)  the  object 
inquired  into  is  Brahman  that  is  an  established  reality,  existing 
for  ever.  As  between  these  two,  the  result  of  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  should  be  different  from  the  result  (heaven  etc.)  of 
the  knowledge  of  virtuous  deeds  depending  on  performance. 

Opponent  (i.e.  Vpttikara):  It  cannot  be  so,  for  Brahman  is 
presented  here  as  a  factor  in  an  injunction  about  some  action. 
For  there  are  such  injunctions  (about  meditation)  as,  “The  Self, 
my  dear,  is  to  be  seen”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  5),  “That  Self  that  is  free 
from  sin, ...  is  to  be  sought  for,  is  to  be  inquired  into”  (Ch.  VIII. 
vii.  1),  “The  Self  alone  is  to  be  (profoundly)  meditated  on” 
(br  I.  iv.  7),  “One  should  meditate  only  on  the  world  of  the 
Self”  (Bf.  I.  iv.  15),  “One  who  wants  to  become  Brahman  shall 
meditate  on  Brahman”61  (Mu.  III.  ii.  9).  As  a  result  of  such 
texts  the  question  arises,  “What  is  that  Self?  What  is  that 
Brahman?”  And  all  such  Upani$adic  terms  as,  “Eternal,  omnis¬ 
cient”  (G.  II.  24),  “ever  satisfied”  (G.  IV.  20),  “even  pure, 
intelligent,  and  free  by  nature”  (Nf.  U.  9),  “Brahman  is  con- 

This  is  the  opponent’s  interpretation.  The  Vedandc  interpretation  is: 
“One  who  knows  Brahman  becomes  Brahman.” 


I.  i.  4  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  25 

sciousness  and  bliss”  (Br.  III.  ix.  28),  and  so  on,  serve  a  purpose 
by  presenting  the  characteristics  of  the  Self  and  Brahman.  From 
Its  worship  will  accrue  the  result,  viz  liberation,  which  is  revealed 
in  the  scriptures,  but  is  not  known  from  any  other  source.  But  if 
the  Upani$adic  sentences  do  not  form  parts  of  injunctions  about 
actions  and  they  refer  merely  to  an  entity,  there  will  be  no 
possibility  of  acceptance  or  rejection,  so  that  they  will  become 
certainly  useless  like  such  sentences  as,  “The  earth  consists  of 
seven  islands”,  “There  goes  that  king”,  and  so  on. 

Objection :  Even  a  simple  statement  about  an  entity  as  in  such 
sentences,  “This  is  not  a  snake,  it  is  a  rope”,  is  seen  to  serve 
some  purpose  by  removing  the  fear  occasioned  by  the  error. 
Similarly  here  also  the  Upani§adic  sentences  will,  by  virtue  of 
their  imparting  instruction  about  the  transcendental  Self,  serve 
the  purpose  of  removing  the  error  of  thinking  oneself  as  a 
transmigrating  soul. 

Opponent :  This  can  be  so  if,  like  the  removal  of  the  error  of 
the  snake  (on  a  rope)  on  hearing  the  nature  of  the  rope,  the 
error  about  transmigration  i$  removed  as  soon  as  one  hears  of 
the  nature  of  Brahman.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  not  removed, 
for  it  is  seen  that  even  in  the  case  of  one  who  has  heard  of 
Brahman,  such  characteristics  of  a  soul  in  bondage  as  happiness, 
sorrow,  etc.  persist  just  as  before.  Besides,  it  is  seen  that  reflec¬ 
tion  and  meditation,  occurring  after  hearing,  are  enjoined  in, 
“The  Self  is  to  be  heard  of,  reflected  on  and  (profoundly) 
meditated  upon”62  (Br.  II.  iv.  5).  Therefore  Brahman  is  to  be 
accepted  as  having  been  presented  by  the  scriptures  (for 
meditation)  in  a  context  of  injunction  about  meditation. 

n$ravana,  manana ,  and  nididhydsana ,  according  to  the  Vedantins,  are 
not  merely  acts  of  hearing,  reflection,  and  profound  meditation  as 
ordinarily  understood.  Sravana  means  a  mental  activity  conducive  to  the 
apprehension  of  all  Upanisadic  texts  as  leading  to  their  only  import. 
Brahman.  And  this  is  achieved  by  an  examination  of  the  texts  through  six 
tests  ( upakrama-upasmhhdra  etc. — see  f.  n.  69).  Manana  is  also  a  mental 
activity  consisting  in  the  employment  of  favourable  arguments  for  the 
removal  of  the  apparent  contradictions  that  such  a  purport  may  raise 
against  other  means  of  valid  knowledge.  And  nididhydsana  is  a  mental 
activity  consisting  in  withdrawing  the  mind  from  other  things  and 
concentrating  it  on  Brahman. 


26 


BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHASYA 


[I.i.4 


Vedantm  :  With  regard  to  this  we 'say:  Not  so;  for  the  results 
of  action  and  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  are  different.  By  virtu¬ 
ous  deeds  are  meant  those  physical,  vocal,  and  mental  actions 
which  are  well  known  in  the  Vedas  and  Smrtis,  and  an  inquiry 
about  which  has  been  set  forth  in  the  aphorism,  “Hence  there¬ 
after  (should  be  commenced)  an  inquiry  about  virtuous  deeds”™ 
(Jai.  Su.  I.  i.  1).  Even  vices  like  injury  are  to  be  inquired  into 
with  a  view  to  shunning  them,  for  they  too  are  revealed  in  the 
Vedic  sentences  expressing  prohibition.  Happiness  and  sorrow  arc 
the  results  of  these  two — of  virtue  and  vice,  consisting  of  good 
and  evil — with  regard  to  which  the  Vedic  texts  (of  injunction 
and  prohibition)  are  authoritative;  and  these  results,  arising  from 
the  contact  of  senses  and  objects,  are  familiarly  experienced  by 
all  creatures  ranging  from  Brahma  to  the  motionless  (trees  etc.). 
The  gradation  of  happiness  among  embodied  beings  starring 
from  men  and  ending  with  Brahma  is  known  from  the  Upanisacls 
(Tai.  II.  viii,  Bj\  IV.  iii.  33).  From  that  again  is  known  a  grada¬ 
tion  in  its  cause  which  is  virtue.  From  a  gradation  of  virtues  is 
known  a  gradation  among  the  persons  qualified  (for  them).  It 
is  a  familiar  fact  that  competence  is  evaluated  in  terms  of  aspira¬ 
tion  and  ability.  As  for  instance,  the  performers  of  sacrifices  etc. 
proceed  along  the  Northern  Course  (after  death)  in  accordance 
with  the  excellence  in  their  meditation  and  concentration  of 
mind,  whereas  they  move  along  the  Southern  Course,  starting 
from  smoke,  as  a  result  of  performing  isfa,  purta,  and  datta .°4 
There  again  (in  the  world  of  the  Moon),  a  gradation  of  happi¬ 
ness  and  the  means  of  its  attainment  is  known  from  the  text, 
“Residing  there  as  long  as  the  result  of  action,  producing  the 
enjoyment,  lasts  (they  come  back)”  (Ch.  V.  x.  5).  Similarly  the 


63  Since  the  Vedas  convey  some  meaning  leading  to  some  results,  there¬ 
fore,  after  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  should  be  commenced  an  inquiry 
about  the  meaning  of  the  Vedic  texts,  that  is  conducive  to  the  ascertain¬ 
ment  of  the  virtuous  deeds. 

04  Northern  Course — also  known  as  the  Path  of  Gods;  and  Southern 
Course  or  the  Path  of  Manes.  Ista — Agnihotra  and  Visvedcva  sacrifices, 
austerity,  truthfulness,  study,  hospitality,  etc.  Piirta — Digging  of  wells, 
construction  of  rest-houses,  temples,  etc.  Datta— Charity,  protection  of 
the  weak,  non-injury,  etc. 


I.  i.  4  J  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  27 

little  happiness,  existing  in  a  graded  order  among  creatures  rang¬ 
ing  from  men  to  the  immobile  and  hellish  ones,  is  known  to  be 
the  product  of  virtuous  deeds  themselves  about  which  the  Vedic 
texts  are  authoritative.  So  also  from  a  perception  of  a  gradation 
of  sorrow  among  higher  and  lower  embodied  beings,  it  becomes 
clear  that  there  is  a  gradation  in  their  causes  which  are  the 
vicious  deeds  prohibited  by  the  authoritative  Vedic  texts,  and 
that  there  is  also  a  gradation  among  the  performers  of  those 
deeds.  Thus  it  is  well  known  from  the  Vedic  texts,  Smftis,  and 
reasoning  that  this  transient  world  is  constituted  by  a  gradation 
of  happiness  and  sorrow,  that  this  gradation  occurs  to  persons 
who  are  subject  to  such  defects  as  ignorance,  and  that  it  comes 
to  them  after  their  birth  and  in  accordance  with  the  gradation 
of  their  virtuous  and  vicious  deeds  (in  earlier  lives).  In  support 
of  this  there  is  the  Vedic  text,  “For  an  embodied  being  there  can 
be  no  eradication  of  happiness  and  sorrow  to  be  sure”  (Ch.  VIII. 
xii.  1),  which  is  a  corroborative  restatement  (aniwdda,  f.n.  54)  of 
the  nature  of  the  world  described  earlier.  And  from  the  denial 
of  any  contact  with  happiness  and  sorrow  as  contained  in  the 
text,  “Happiness  and  sorrow  do  not  touch  one  who  is  definitely 
bodiless”  (ibid.),  it  follows  that  it  is  with  regard  to  emancipa¬ 
tion,  which  is  the  same  as  bodilessness,  that  the  denial  is  made 
of  its  ever  being  the  result  of  virtuous  deeds  of  which  the  Vedic 
texts  are  the  only  means  of  knowledge.  For  if  it  be  a  product  of 
virtuous  deeds  (e.g.  meditation),  there  can, be  no  denial  of  its 
contact  with  happiness  and  sorrow. 

Opponent :  Unembodiedness  (i.e.  the  state  of  not  being 
identified  with  the  body)  can  itself  be  the  product  of  virtuous 
deeds. 

Vedantin :  Not  so;  for  unembodiedness  is  inherent  in  the  Self 
in  accordance  with  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “Having  meditated  on 
the  Self  as  bodiless  in  the  midst  of  bodies,  as  permanent  in  the 
midst  of  the  impermanent,  and  as  great  and  pervasive,  the  wise 
man  ceases  to  grieve”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  22),  “For  that  Puru$a  (infinite 
Being)  is  without  vital  force  (i.e.  organs  of  action)  and  mind 
(i.e.  organs  of  perception)”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  “For  this  infinite 
Being  is  unattached”  (B|\  IV.  iii.  15).  Hence  it  is  proved  that 
the  unembodiedness,  called  liberation,  is  eternal  and  different 


28  BRA  HM A  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [  I.  i.  4 

from  the  results  of  works  that  have  to  be  performed.  Among 
things  permanent,  some  are  changefully  permanent,  with  regard 
to  which  the  idea,  “That  very  thing  is  this  one”,  does  not  get 
sublated  even  though  the  thing  goes  on  changing,  as  for  instance 
the  earth  according  to  those  who  say  that  the  world  is  perma¬ 
nent,  or  the  three  constituents  of  matter  ( sattva ,  rajas ,  and 
tamas)  according  to  the  Samkhyas.  But  this  one  is  unchangingly 
permanent  in  an  absolute  sense;  It  is  all-pervasive  like  space, 
devoid  of  all  modifications,  ever  content,  partless,  and  self- 
effulgent  by  nature.  This  is  that  unembodiedness,  called  libera¬ 
tion,  where  the  idea  of  the  three  periods  of  time  does  not  exist 
and  virtuous  and  vicious  deeds  cease  along  with  their  effects 
(happiness  and  sorrow),  as  stated  in  the  Vedic  text,  “Speak  of 
that  thing  which  you  see  as  different  from  virtue  and  vice, 
different  from  cause  and  effect,  and  different  from  the  past  and 
the  future”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14).  (Since  liberation  is  different  from  the 
result  of  work,  it  being  unrelated  to  virtue  and  vice),  therefore 
liberation  is  the  same  as  Brahman  about  which  this  deliberation 
is  started.  Had  liberation  been  spoken  of  (in  the  scriptures)  as 
being  supplementary  to  action  and  had  it  been  asserted  as  a  thing 
to  be  achieved,  it  would  become  impermanent.  In  that  case 
liberation  would  become  some  sort  of  an  excellent  product 
amidst  a  horde  of  above-mentioned  products  of  work  standing 
in  a  graded  order.  But  all  who  believe  in  liberation  admit  it  to 
be  eternal.  Thus  (since  liberation  is  the  same  as  Brahman),  it  is 
not  proper  to  talk  of  Brahman  as  though  it  formed  a  factor  in 
some  action.  Besides,  the  (following)  texts  show  liberation  as 
coming  immediately  after  the  knowledge  of  Brahman;  and 
thereby  they  deny  any  activity  in  the  interval:  “Anyone  who 
knows  Brahman  becomes  Brahman”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  19),  “When 
that  Brahman,  the  basis  of  all  causes  and  effects,  becomes  known, 
all  the  results  of  his  (i.e.  aspirant’s)  actions  become  exhausted” 
(Mu.  II.  ii.  8),  “One  who  knows  the  Bliss  (that  is  the  very 
nature)  of  Brahman,  ceases  to  have  any  fear  from  anything” 
(Tai.  II.  ix),  “O  Janaka,  you  have  certainly  attained  (Brahman 
that  is)  fearlessness”  (Bf.  IV.  ii.  4),  “It  knew  only  Itself  as, 
‘I  am  Brahman’,  thereby  It  became  All”  (Bf.  I.  iv.  10),  “Then 
what  delusion  and  what  sorrow  can  there  be  for  that  seer  of 


I.i.4  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH ASYA  29 

unity?”  (Is.  7),  and  so  on.  So  also  one  should  refer  to  the 
following  text  for  the  denial  of  any  duty  in  between  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  Brahman  and  becoming  All:  “While  realizing  this  (Self) 
as  that  Brahman,  the  seer  Vamadeva  knew,  ‘I  was  Manu  and  I 
was  the  sun’”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  10).  This  is  just  like  the  sentence, 
“Standing  there  he  sings”,  where  it  can  be  understood  that  the 
man  has  no  other  activity  in  between  his  standing  and  singing. 
And  the  following  and  similar  other  texts  show  that  the  result 
of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  nothing  but  the  removal  of 
the  obstacles  to  liberation:  “You  indeed  are  our  father  who  have 
ferried  us  across  nescience  to  the  other  shore”  (Pr.  VI.  8),  “For 
it  has  been  heard  from  the  adorable  ones  like  yourself  that  the 
knower  of  the  Self  goes  beyond  sorrow.  Sir,  such  as  I  am,  I  am 
sorrowful.  May  you,  O  venerable  sir,  ferry  me  across  nescience” 
(Ch.  VII.  i.  3),  “The  adorable  Sanatkumara  showed  the  other 
shore  of  nescience  to  him  (i.e.  to  Narada)  who  had  become  free 
from  defects”  (Ch.  VII.  xxvi.  2).  There  is  also  in  evidence  the 
aphorism  of  the  great  teacher  Gautama,  supported  by  reasoning: 
“Liberation  is  possible  since  the  earlier  ones  in  the  series  of 
sorrow,  birth,  impulsion  (to  virtue  and  vice),  defects  (e.g. 
attachment,  repulsion,  delusion,  etc.),  and  false  knowledge,  get 
destroyed  (in  the  reverse  order)  on  the  destruction  of  the  im¬ 
mediately  succeeding  ones”  (N.  S.  I.  i.  2).  And  the  removal  of 
false  ignorance  follows  from  the  knowledge  of  the  unity  of  the 
individual  Self  and  Brahman. 

But  this  knowledge  of  the  unity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman  is 
not  a  kind  of  meditation,  called  Sampad ,65  as  in  “The  mind  is 
certainly  infinite,  and  the  ViSvedevas  are  infinite.  Through  this 
meditation  one  wins  an  infinite  world”  (Bf.  III.  i.  9).  Nor  is  it 
a  form  of  meditation  called  Adhyasa ,6G  as  in  “One  should 
meditate  thus:  ‘The  mind  is  Brahman’”  (Ch.  III.  xviii.  1)  and 
“The  instruction  is:  ‘The  sun  is  Brahman’”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1), 
where  the  idea  of  Brahman  is  superimposed  on  the  mind,  the 

“Where  an  inferior  factor  is  thought  of  as  a  Superior  factor  on 
account  of  some  similarity.  The  superior  predominates,  and  the  inferior 
is  almost  ignored,  c.g.  the  Visvedevas  occupy  the  mind  for  the  time  being. 

“Where  the  factor  superimposed  (say,  Brahman)  occupies  a  subsidiary 
position,  while  the  locus  (say,  the  mind  or  sun)  predominates. 


30  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [  I.  i.  4 

sun,  etc.  Nor  is  it  a  meditation  based  on  some  special  activity, 
as  in,  “Air  is  certainly  the  place  of  merger”,  “The  vital  force  is 
certainly  the  place  of  merger”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  1-4). 67  Nor  is  it  a 
kind  of  purification  of  some  factor  in  some  (Vedic)  rite,  as  for 
instance  the  act  of  looking  at  the  oblation  (by  the  sacrifice's 
wife  for  its  purification).68  If  the  Knowledge  of  the  unity  of 
the  Self  and  Brahman  is  accepted  as  a  kind  of  Sampad  etc.,  then 
it  will  flout  the  ascertainable  meaning69  of  all  the  words  occur¬ 
ring  in  such  sentences  and  establishing  the  unity  of  the  Self 
and  Brahman  as,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  “I  am 
Brahman”  (Br.  I.  iv.  10),  “This  Self  is  Brahman”  (Bj*.  II.  v.  19). 
Besides,  thereby  will  be  set  at  nought  such  sentences  as,  “The 
knots  of  the  heart  are  untied  and  all  doubts  are  resolved”  (Mu. 
II.  ii.  8),  in  which  one  hears  of  the  result  (of  knowledge)  con¬ 
sisting  in  the  cessation  of  nescience.  Furthermore,  from  the 
point  of  view  of  Sampad  etc.,  such  sentences  as,  “One  who 
knows  Brahman  becomes  Brahman”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  9),  which  speak 
of  unity,  with  Brahman,  cannot  be  fully  justified.  Therefore  the 
knowledge  of  the  unity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman  is  not  a  kind  of 
Sampad  or  anything  of  that  sort.  Hence  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  is  not  dependent  on  human  action. 

On  what  does  it  depend  then? 

It  is  dependent  on  the  thing  itself,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
knowledge  of  a  thing  got  through  such  valid  means  as  direct 
perception.  By  no  stretch  of  imagination  can  such  a  Brahman 
or  Its  knowledge  be  brought  into  contact  with  work.  Nor  can 
it  be  held  that  Brahman  has  some  association  with  work  by 
virtue  of  Its  being  the  object  of  the  act  of  knowing;  for  in  the 
text,  “It  is  different  from  the  known  and  also  different  from  the 
unknown”70  (Ke.  I.  4),  as  also  in  the  text,  “Through  what  should 

07  Where  the  two  factors,  air  and  vital  force,  remain  distinct,  though 
thought  of  as  one  owing  to  similarity  of  action,  viz  merger  of  all  things 
into  air  during  dissolution  and  into  the  vital  force  during  sleep. 

®The  knowledge  “I  am  Brahman”  is  not  meant  for  the  mere  purifica¬ 
tion  of  the  individual  being,  viz  the  sacrificer. 

08  Meaning  ascertained  through  the  six  tests — commencement-ending, 
repetition,  uniqueness,  result,  eulogy,  reason. 

70  Known,  i.e.  effect;  unknown,  i.e.  cause. 


Li.  4] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


31 


one  know  that  owing  to  which  all  this  is  known?”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  14), 
Brahman  is  denied  to  be  an  object  of  the  act  of  knowing.  So  also 
there  is  the  denial  of  Its  being  the  object  of  the  act  of  meditation. 
For  in  the  text,  “That  which  is  not  uttered  by  speech,  that  by 
which  speech  is  revealed”,  it  is  first  declared  that  Brahman  is 
not  an  object,  and  then  it  is  said,  “Know  that  alone  to  be 
Brahman  and  not  what  people  worship  as  an  object”  (Ke.  I.  5). 

Opponent:  If  Brahman  be  not  an  object  (of  knowledge),  It 
cannot  logically  be  presented  bv  the  scriptures  (as  stated  in 
B.  S.  I.  i.  3). 

Veddntin :  Not  so,  for  the  scriptures  aim  at  the  removal  of  the 
differences  fancied  through  ignorance.  Not  that  the  scriptures 
seek  to  establish  Brahman  as  an  entity  referable  objectively  by 
the  word  “this”. 

What  do  they  do  then? 

By  presenting  Brahman  as  not  an  object  on  account  of  Its 
being  the  inmost  Self  (of  the  knower),  they  remove  the  differ¬ 
ences  of  the  “known”,  the  “knower”,  and  the  “knowledge”  that 
are  fancied  through  ignorance.71  In  support  of  this  are  the  texts, 

71  The  idea  is  expressed  thus  in  the  Brhadaranyaka  commentary 
(IV.  iv.  20):  “The  scriptures  too  describe  the  Self  merely  by  the  negation 
of  the  activities  of  the  subject,  the  evidences  of  knowledge,  and  so  on; . . . 
and  not  by  resorting  to  the  usual  function  of  a  sentence  in  which  some¬ 
thing  is  described  by  means  of  names.  Therefore  even  in  scriptures,  the 
Self  is  not  presented  like  heaven  or  Mount  Meru  for  instance. . . .  The 
knowledge  of  Brahman  too  means  only  the  cessation  of  the  identification 
with  extraneous  things  (such  as  the  body).”  Thus  since  Brahman  is  not 
presentable  positively  by  saying,  “This  is  so”.  It  cannot  be  the  object  of 
scriptural  knowledge  in  this  sense.  But  It  can  be  presented  negatively  as 
“Not  this,  not  this”,  and  thus  It  can  be  known  from  the  scriptures,  which 
are  a  valid  means  of  knowledge.  This  is  technically  explained  thus: 

Brahman  is  comprehended  in  the  unanalysable  mentation  ( vrtti )  of  the 
form,  “I  am  Brahman”,  that  arises  from  hearing  the  great  Upanisadic 
saying,  “That  thou  art”.  And  yet  Brahman  is  said  to  be  inexpressible  by 
words,  because  It  is  not  comprehended  by  the  “resulting  consciousness”  or 
“apprehending  consciousness”  ( phala ),  which  is  defined  as  the  mentation 
with  the  reflection  of  Consciousness  on  it.  In  common  experience,  the 
mentation  of  the  form  of  a  pot,  with  the  reflection  of  Consciousness  on 
it,  goes  out  of  a  person  to  envelop  the  pot.  Then  that  mentation  destroys 
the  ignorance  about  the  pot;  still  the  witnessing  Consciousness  is  needed 


32  BRAHMA  -  StTTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  I.  i.  4 

“Brahman  is  known  to  him  to  whom  It  is  unknown,  while  It  is 
unknown  to  him  to  whom  It  is  known.  It  is  unknown  to  those 
who  know  and  known  to  those  who  do  not  know”  (Ke.  II.  3), 
“You  cannot  see  that  which  is  the  witness  of  vision, . . .  you 
cannot  know  that  which  is  the  knower  of  knowledge”  (Bj\  III. 
iv.  2),  and  so  on.  Therefore  there  can  be  no  question  of  liberation 
becoming  impermanent,  for  in  it  is  revealed  the  reality  of  the 
eternally  free  Self,  after  eliminating  from  the  Self  the  idea  of  Its 
being  under  the  bondage  (of  birth  and  death),  fancied  on  It 
through  ignorance.  But  from  the  standpoint  of  one  who  believes 
that  liberation  is  a  product,  it  is  but  logical  that  there  should  be  a 
dependence  on  activity — mental,  vocal,  and  physical.  The  posi¬ 
tion  becomes  the  same  if  liberation  be  a  transformation  of  some¬ 
thing.  From  either  point  of  view,  liberation  must  of  necessity 
be  impermanent;  for  neither  curd  that  is  a  modification,  nor  a 
jar  that  is  a  product  is  seen  to  be  permanent  in  this  world.  And 
no  dependence  on  work  can  be  proved  by  assuming  liberation 
to  be  a  thing  to  be  acquired;  for  it  being  essentially  one  with 
one’s  very  Self,  there  can  be  no  acquisition.  Even  if  Brahman 
be  different  from  oneself,  there  can  be  no  acquisition,  for 
Brahman  being  all-pervasive  like  space,  It  remains  ever  attained 
by  everybody.  Liberation  cannot  also  be  had  through  purifica¬ 
tion,  so  as  to  be  dependent  on  action.  Purification  is  achieved 
either  through  the  addition  of  some  quality  or  removal  of  some 
defect.  As  to  that,  purification  is  not  possible  here  through  the 
addition  of  any  quality,  since  liberation  is  of  the  very  nature  of 
Brahman  on  which  no  excellence  (or  deterioration)  can  be 
effected.  Nor  is  that  possible  through  the  removal  of  any  defect, 
for  liberation  is  of  the  very  nature  of  Brahman  that  is  ever 
pure. 

Opponent :  May  it  not  be,  that  though  liberation  is  inherent 


to  reveal  the  pot  through  a  manifestation  of  the  identity  of  the  Conscious¬ 
ness  underlying  the  pot  and  the  apprehending  Consciousness.  The  menta¬ 
tion  about  Brahman  destroys  the  ignorance  about  and  the  ignorance 
subsisting  on  It.  But  the  apprehending  Consciousness  cannot  reveal 
Brahman,  the  ( phala )  mentation  being  included  in  ignorance  itself  as 
the  latter’s  product,  so  that  it  gets  destroyed  along  with  that  ignorance 
and  can  have  no  further  action. 


I.  i.4]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  33 

in  oneself,  it  remains  covered  and  it  becomes  manifest  when  the 
Self  is  purified  by  action,  as  the  brilliance  of  a  mirror  does  when 
cleaned  by  the  act  of  rubbing? 

Vedantin :  No,  since  the  Self  cannot  reasonably  be  the  sphere 
of  any  action,  for  no  action  can  take  place  without  bringing 
about  some  change  in  its  locus.  But  if  the  Self  changes  through 
action.  It  will  be  subject  to  impermanence,  and  that  will  militate 
against  such  texts  as,  “It  is  said  to  be  immutable”  (Gita,  II.  25). 
And  that  is  undesirable.  Hence  the  Self  can  have  no  action 
occurring  on  Itself.  And  action,  taking  place  on  something  else, 
cannot  purify  the  Self,  which  is  not  an  object  thereof. 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  experience  that  the  embodied 
soul  is  purified  by  such  activities  occurring  on  the  body  as  bath, 
rinsing  of  the  mouth,  wearing  the  sacrificial  thread,  etc.? 

Vedantin  :  Not  so.  It  is  the  soul,  cognized  through  ignorance,72 
as  constituting  a  factor  in  the  assemblage  of  body  etc.,  that  can 
be  purified;  for  bath,  rinsing  of  the  mouth,  etc.  are  directly 
perceived  as  associated  with  the  body.  It  is  reasonable  that  some¬ 
thing  associated  with  the  body  and  cognized  as  the  Self  through 
ignorance  should  be  purified  by  the  actions  taking  place  on  the 
body.  Just  as  that  very  entity  gets  the  result  of  being  cured, 
which  is  conjoined  with  the  body,  which  identifies  itself  with 
the  body,  and  on  which  arises  the  idea,  “I  am  cured”,  consequent 
on  the  establishment  of  the  balance  of  the  constituents  of  the 
body  (phlegm,  bile,  and  wind),  through  a  treatment  of  the 
body,  so  also  that  entity  is  purified  to  which  occurs  the  idea,  “I 
am  purified”,  as  a  result  of  such  actions  as  bathing,  rinsing  the 
mouth,  or  wearing  the  sacrificial  thread;  and  that  entity  certainly 
remains  bound  up  with  the  body.  For  all  actions  are  surely 
performed  and  the  fruits  thereof  enjoyed  by  that  entity  which 
has  the  idea,  “I  am  the  doer”,  stemming  out  of  the  idea  of  “I”, 
and  which  cognizes  everything,  as  stated  in  the  mantra ,  “One 
of  the  two  enjoys  the  fruits  having  (various)  tastes,  while  the 
other  looks  on  without  enjoying”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1),  as  also  the  text, 
“The  wise  people  call  that  the  enjoyer  which  is  associated  with 
body,  organs,  and  mind”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  4).  So  also  there  are  the 


72  The  individual  Self  reflected  on  nescience. 
3 


34  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.  4 

texts:  “The  one  deity  remains  hidden  in  all  beings.  He  is  all- 
pervasive,  the  indwelling  Self  of  all,  the  regulator  of  ail  actions, 
the  support  of  all  beings,  the  witness,  consciousness,  non-dual, 
and  without  qualities”  (Sv.  VI.  11),  and  “He  is  omnipresent, 
effulgent,  without  body,  wound,  and  sinews,  pure  and  untouched 
by  sin”  (Is.  8).  These  two  mantras  show  that  Brahman  is  beyond 
the  imputation  of  all  kinds  of  excellence  (or  inferiority),  and  It 
is  ever  pure.  Liberation  is  the  state  of  identity  with  Brahman, 
and  hence  it  is  not  to  be  achieved  through  purification.  Besides, 
apart  from  these,73  nobody  can  show  any  other  mode  whereby 
liberation  can  be  associated  with  action.  Accordingly,  apart  from 
knowledge  alone,  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  touch  of  action 
here. 

Opponent :  Is  not  knowledge  a  kind  of  mental  action? 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  because  there  is  a  difference.  x\n  action  is 
in  evidence  where  the  injunction  about  it  occurs  independently 
of  the  nature  of  the  thing  concerned,  and  where  it  is  subject  to 
the  activities  of  the  human  mind,  as  for  instance  in  such  sentences 
as,  “When  the  priest  (called  Hota)  is  about  to  utter  (the 
mantra)  vausat,  he  shall  meditate  mentally  on  the  deity  for 
whom  the  libation  is  taken  up  (by  the  Adhvaryu)”  (Ai.  Br.  XI. 
viii.  1),  “One  should  mentally  meditate  on  (the  deity  identified 
with)  evening”  (ibid).  Though  meditation,  that  is  but  thinking, 
is  a  mental  action,  yet  it  can  be  done,  not  done,  or  done  other¬ 
wise  by  a  man;  for  it  is  dependent  on  man.  But  knowledge  arises 
from  its  valid  means  (e.g.  perception,  inference,  etc.);  and  the 
valid  means  apprehend  the  things  just  as  they  are.  Hence  (valid) 
knowledge  is  not  something  to  be  done,  not  done,  or  done  other¬ 
wise,  for  it  is  entirely  determined  by  things,  and  neither  by 
injunctions  nor  by  man.  Hence  though  knowledge  is  a  mental 
act,  it  has  a  great  difference.  For  instance,  the  thinking  of  a 
man  or  a  woman  as  fire  in,  “O  Gautama,  a  man  is  surely  a  fire” 
(Ch.  V.  vii.  1),  “O  Gautama,  a  woman  is  surely  a  fire”  (Ch.  V. 
viii.  1),  is  certainly  an  act,  since  it  arises  from  injunction  alone 
and  it  is  dependent  on  man.  But  the  idea  of  fire  with  regard  to 
the  familiar  fire  is  neither  dependent  on  injunction  nor  on  man. 

78  Production,  acquisition,  transformation,  and  purification. 


Li.  4] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


35 


What  is  it  then? 

Since  it  is  determined  by  a  thing  coming  within  the  range  of 
perception,  it  is  surely  knowledge  and  not  action.  Thus  also  it 
is  to  be  understood  in  the  case  of  all  objects  coming  within  the 
range  of  valid  means  of  knowledge.  That  being  so,  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  unity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self  (that  is  never 
sublated)  is  also  a  kind  of  knowledge  and  it  is  not  determined 
by  injunction.  Though  verbs  in  the  imperative  mood  etc.  are 
seen  (in  the  Upani§ad)  to  be  used  with  regard  to  this  know¬ 
ledge,  they  become  infructuous  like  the  sharpness  of  razor  etc. 
striking  against  stone  etc.,  for  they  are  aimed  at  something 
beyond  the  range  of  human  effort  inasmuch  as  that  knowledge 
has  for  its  object  something  (i.e.  Brahman)  that  is  neither 
acceptable  nor  rejectable. 

Opponent :  Why  are  there  then  texts  like  “The  Self,  my  dear 
Maitreyl,  should  be  realized,  should  be  heard  of”  etc.  (By.  II. 
iv.  5),  which  have  a  semblance  of  injunction? 

Vedantin  :  We  say  that  they  are  meant  for  weaning  one  back 
from  objects  towards  which  one  inclines  naturally.  For  a  man 
hankering  after  the  highest  human  goal  and  engaging  in  out¬ 
ward  objects  under  the  idea,  “May  good  come  to  me,  may  not 
evil  befall  me”,  but  failing  to  achieve  thereby  the  highest  human 
goal,  there  are  such  texts  as,  “The  Self,  my  dear  Maitreyi,  should 
be  realized”.  These  turn  him  back  from  the  objects,  naturally 
attracting  his  body  and  senses  etc.  towards  them,  and  then  they 
lead  him  along  the  current  of  the  indwelling  Self.74  And  for 
him,  when  he  engages  in  the  search  of  the  Self,  is  presented  in 
the  following  texts  the  reality  of  the  Self,  that  is  beyond  all 
acceptance  and  rejection:  “All  these  are  but  that  Self”  (Bjr.  II. 
iv.  6),  “But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman  everything  has 

74  It  is  not  an  injunction  but  a  sort  of  eulogy,  the  apparent  injunction 
being  meant  for  inducing  the  hearer  to  the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  By 
producing  in  his  mind  a  current  of  thoughts  directed  towards  the 
indwelling  Self,  this  inspires  the  man  to  “hear,  reflect,  and  meditate” 
about  the  Self,  these  processes  being  the  means  of  generating  the  knowl¬ 
edge  of  Brahman.  The  V  war  ana  school  does  not  admit  any  injunction 
in  the  case  of  knowledge;  but  a  Niyama-vidhi ,  in  the  primary  sense,  is 
admitted  in  the  case  of  “hearing”;  in  the  case  of  reflection  and  meditation, 
this  is  admitted  in  a  secondary  sense. 


36  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.4 

become  the  Self, . . .  what  should  one  know  and  through  what? 
...Through  what,  O  Maitreyi,  should  one  know  the  knower?” 
(Bf.  IV.  v.  15),  “The  Self  is  Brahman”  (Bj*.  II.  v.  19),  and  so  on. 
As  for  the  criticism  that  a  knowledge  of  the  Self  that  docs  not 
combine  with  some  action  as  its  part  cannot  be  meant  either  for 
acceptance  or  rejection,  we  admit  it  to  be  so  indeed.  It  redounds 
to  our  credit  that,  on  the  realization  of  Brahman,  there  follow 
the  attainment  of  full  satisfaction  and  stoppage  of  all  duties.  In 
support  of  this  is  the  Vedic  text:  “If  a  man  knows  the  Self  as 
‘I  am  this’,  then  desiring  what  and  for  whose  sake  will  he  suffer 
in  the  wake  of  the  body?”  (Bf.  IV  iv.  12);  and  there  is  the 
Smjrti  text:  “O  Arjuna,  knowing  this,  one  attains  the  highest 
intelligence  and  will  have  accomplished  all  one’s  duties”  (Gita, 
XV.  20).  Therefore  Brahman  is  not  presented  as  a  factor  in 
any  injunction  about  knowledge. 

As  for  the  assertion  of  some  people  (viz  followers  of 
Prabhakara)  that  apart  from  injunctions  and  prohibitions  and 
factors  connected  with  them  as  subsidiaries,  no  section  of  the 
Vedas  speaks  of  mere  things  as  such,  we  say  that  this  is  wrong. 
For  the  all-pervasive  entity,  presented  in  the  Upani$ads  alone, 
cannot  be  a  subsidiary  of  anything  else.  It  cannot  be  said  that 
Brahman  does  not  exist,  nor  can  It  be  realized  even  though  It  is 
known  from  the  Upani$ads  as  the  all-pervasive  entity  beyond 
worldly  qualities,  as  different  from  all  things  belonging  to  the 
four  classes,  viz  those  that  can  be  produced,  (purified,  trans¬ 
formed,  and  achieved),  and  as  occurring  in  Its  own  context  (in 
the  Upanisads)  and  hence  not  forming  a  part  of  anything  else; 
because  that  Brahman  is  called  the  Self  in  the  text,  “This  is  the 
Self  which  has  been  described  as  ‘Not  this,  not  this’”  (Hr.  III. 
ix.  26)  and  because  the  Self  cannot  be  denied  inasmuch  as  It  is 
the  Self  even  of  one  who  would  deny  It. 

Opponent :  It  is  not  proved  that  the  Self  is  known  from  the 
Upani§ads  alone  inasmuch  as  It  is  contained  in  the  idea  of  “I”. 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  this  has  been  refuted  by  saying  that 
the  Self  is  the  witness  of  that  idea.  Leaving  aside  the  (erroneous) 
knowledge  of  the  Self  as  the  agent  (of  actions),  as  contained  in 
the  idea  of  “I”,  the  (real)  Self — which  is  the  witness  of  the  idea 
of  “I”,  which  exists  in  all  creatures,  which  is  without  any  differ- 


Li.  4] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


37 


ence  of  degrees,  and  which  is  one,  unchanging,  eternal,  and  all- 
pervasive  consciousness — (such  a  Self)  is  not  known  as  the  Self 
of  all  by  anyone  in  the  section  of  the  Vedas  dealing  with  virtu¬ 
ous  deeds,  or  in  the  scriptures  of  the  logicians.  Hence  this  Self 
cannot  be  denied  by  anyone,  nor  can  It  be  taken  as  forming  a 
part  of  any  injunction.  And  because  It  is  the  Self  of  all.  It  is 
beyond  all  rejection  and  acceptance;  for  all  mutable  and  im¬ 
permanent  things  culminate  in  Puru§a  (the  all-pervasive  Entity) 
as  their  ultimate  limit.76  Since  Purusa  has  no  cause  of  destruc¬ 
tion,  He  is  indestructible;  and  since  there  is  no  cause  for  change, 
He  is  changelessly  eternal;  and  hence  He  is  by  nature  ever  pure, 
intelligent,  and  free.  Thus  the  text,  “There  is  nothing  higher 
than  Puru$a;  He  is  the  culmination,  He  is  the  highest  goal” 
(Ka.  I.  iii.  11)  stands  justified.  Accordingly,  the  distinctive 
reference  to  Puru$a  as  being  known  only  from  the  Upani$ads,  as 
stated  in  the  text,  “I  ask  you  of  that  Puru$a  who  is  to  be  known 
only  from  the  Upani$ads”  (Bj\  III.  ix.  26),  becomes  justifiable 
if  Puru§a  is  the  primary  object  to  be  revealed  by  the  Upani$ads. 
Hence  it  is  mere  bravado  to  say  that  there  is  no  section  of  the 
Vedas  dealing  with  things  as  such. 

As  for  the  statements  of  the  people  versed  in  scriptures  that 
“The  perceptible  result  of  these  (Vedas)  is  the  production  of 
the  knowledge  of  virtuous  deeds”,  and  so  on,  since  these  relate 
to  an  inquiry  about  virtuous  deeds,  they  are  to  be  understood 
as  referring  to  the  scriptures  dealing  with  injunction  and  pro¬ 
hibition.  Besides,  for  those  who  accept  in  any  absolute  sense  the 
aphorism,  “Since  the  Vedas  reveal  action,  those  texts  that  do  not 
have  that  purport  are  meaningless”,  all  instructions  about  things 
as  such  become  useless.  If,  however,  it  is  held  that,  as  distinct 
from  impulsion  for  or  repulsion  from  action,  things  are  taught 
in  the  scriptures  as  accessories  of  actions,  what  reason  can  there 
be  to  assert  that  the  unchangingly  eternal  entity  (Brahman)  is 
not  spoken  of  (in  the  scriptures)?  Not  that  a  thing  about  which 
any  instruction  is  imparted,  becomes  an  action  thereby. 


70  As  the  ultimate  reality  into  which  all  things  can  be  reduced,  this 
Puru$a  remains  unchanged,  and  into  Him  all  things  enter  like  the  false 
snake  etc.  entering  into  the  rope  etc. 


38  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA$YA  [Li. 4 

Opponent :  Though  a  thing  is  not  an  action,  still  the  instruc¬ 
tion  about  a  thing  is  meant  for  being  acted  on,  it  being  a  means 
for  the  action. 

Vedantin  :  That  is  no  valid  objection;  for  even  when  a  thing 
is  presented  for  the  sake  of  some  action,  there  is  no  denying  the 
fact  that  the  instruction  relates  to  something  having  the  capacity 
to  aid  some  action.  It  may  serve  that  purpose  by  becoming  a 
factor  in  some  action;  but  this  does  not  amount  to  saying  that  a 
thing  as  such  is  not  taught  in  the  scriptures. 

Opponent :  Granted  that  instruction  is  imparted  about  things, 
what  do  you  gain  thereby? 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedmtrn)  is:  The  instruction  about  the 
unknown  thing  called  the  Self  is  possible  like  those  very  things 
(e.g.  curd,  Soma,  etc.).  Its  knowledge  serves  the  purpose  of  eradi¬ 
cating  the  unreal  nescience  that  is  the  cause  of  the  worldly  state. 
Thus  in  this  way  its  purposefulness  is  quite  on  a  par  with  that 
of  the  instruction  about  things  that  are  the  accessories  of  work.70 
Moreover,  there  is  the  instruction  about  cessation  from  work  in 
such  texts  as,  “As  Brahmana  should  not  be  killed”.  And  that  is 
neither  an  action  nor  an  accessory  of  action.  If  the  instruction  of 
things  not  meant  for  action  be  useless,  then  the  injunction  about 
withholding  from  action  in  such  texts  as,  “A*  Brahmana  should 
not  be  killed”,  becomes  useless.  But  that  is  undesirable.  From 
the  connection  of  the  negative  {no)  with  the  meaning  of  the 
root  ban  (to  kill),  the  meaning  derived  is  an  inactivity  consisting 
in  not  undertaking  the  act  of  killing  that  might  have  been 
resorted  to  out  of  natural  proclivity.  Apart  from  this  holding 
aloof  from  killing,  no  other  new  activity,  that  is  not  guaranteed 
by  the  negative,  can  be  fancied  here.  For  it  is  the  very  nature 
of  the  negative  to  convey  the  idea  of  the  non-existence  of  the 
action  with  which  it  gets  connected.  The  idea  of  non-existence 
causes  inactivity,  and  that  idea  ceases  to  exist  automatically  like 


™  Objection:  Curd  as  such  may  have  no  purpose;  but  when  used  in  a 
sacrifice,  it  helps  in  the  production  of  the  result  set  forth  in  the  Vrd.is. 
But  Brahman  has  no  such  connection  with  action,  and  is  therefore  abso¬ 
lutely  useless. 

Answer:  Not  so,  for  the  instruction  about  Brahman  serves  its  own 
purpose,  viz  removal  of  ignorance. 


I.  i.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  39 

fire  that  has  exhausted  its  fuel.77  Therefore  we  think  that  except 
in  such  cases  as  the  “Vow  of  Prajapati”,78  the  meaning  of  prohi¬ 
bition  in  sentences  like  “A  Brahmana  should  not  be  killed”  is 
mere  inaction  consisting  in  not  undertaking  an  act  for  which 
an  impulse  had  arisen.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the 
statement  of  the  uselessness  (occurring  in  the  aphorism),  “Since 
scriptures  are  meant  for  enjoining  action,  those  words  that  are 
not  meant  for  action  are  useless”  (Jai  Su.  I.  ii.  1),  relates  to  the 
corroborative  statements  ( Arthavada )  like  mythological  stories 
that  do  not  serve  any  human  purpose.  Although  it  was  argued 
that  a  reference  to  any  object  as  such,  without  its  being  con¬ 
nected  with  an  injunction  about  work,  will  be  useless  like  the 
statements,  “The  earth  has  seven  islands”,  etc.,  that  argument  is 
demolished  on  the  evidence  of  the  usefulness  of  such  statements 
of  facts  as,  “This  is  a  rope  and  not  a  snake”.79 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  a  statement  about  Brahman 
cannot  be  useful  like  the  statement  about  the  nature  of  the  rope, 
since  it  is  a  patent  fact  that  even  a  man  who  has  heard  of  Brahman 
continues  to  have  his  mundane  life  just  as  before? 

Vedantin :  To  this  the  ahswer  is  being  given:  For  one  who 
has  realized  the  state  of  the  unity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman,  it 
cannot  be  proved  that  his  mundane  life  continues  just  as  before; 

77  From  the  prohibition  the  hearer  gets  the  idea,  “It  dissuades  me  from 
the  act  of  killing  a  Brahmana.  This  leads  to  inactivity,  which  is  the  very 
nature  of  the  Self.  The  prohibition  removes  the  idea  that  he  entertained 
of  gaining  something  from  the  murder,  so  that  when  the  idea  of  non¬ 
existence  of  gain  dies  away,  the  proclivity  does  not  recur. 

78  In  the  “Vow  of  Prajapati”  a  young  man,  about  to  enter  the  house¬ 
holder’s  life  after  finishing  his  studies,  is  asked  not  to  look  at  the  rising 
sun,  the  sun  under  an  eclipse,  the  sun  reflected  in  water,  and  the  sun  at 
the  zenith,  and  not  to  cross  over  the  tether  of  a  calf.  Here  the  meaning 
of  the  negative  is  not  mere  withdrawal  from  activity;  for  in  the  text,  the 
prohibitions  are  preceded  by  a  positive  injunction  for  undertaking  a  vow. 
Hence  such  instances  are  exceptions  to  the  general  meaning  of  the  nega¬ 
tive  as  non-existence.  This  is  the  Vedantic  standpoint,  whereas  the  oppo¬ 
nent  will  say  that  in  all  cases  of  prohibition,  the  meaning  is  not  a  mere 
negation  of  some  act,  but  the  injunction  of  its  opposite.  Thus  "A 
Brahmana  should  not  be  killed”  means,  “Non-killing  of  a  Brahmana  is  to 
be  resorted  to”. 

78  Which  statement  removes  the  fear  of  the  snake. 


40  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.  4 

for  this  contradicts  the  knowledge  of  the  unity  of  Brahman  and 
the  Self  arising  from  the  Vedas  which  are  a  valid  means  of 
knowledge.  From  noticing  the  fact  that  a  man  can  have  sorrow, 
fear,  etc.  as  a  result  of  his  identifying  himself  with  the  body 
etc.,  it  does  not  follow  that  this  very  man  will  have  sorrow  etc. 
contingent  on  false  ignorance,  even  when  his  self-identification 
with  the  body  etc.  ceases  after  the  realization  of  the  unity  of 
Brahman  and  the  Self,  arising  from  the  Vedas  which  are  a  valid 
means  of  knowledge.  Just  because  a  householder,  who  had 
been  rich  and  prided  himself  on  that  account,  had  been  seen 
to  be  sorrowing  for  the  theft  of  his  wealth,  it  does  not 
follow  that  this  very  man  will  be  miserable  for  any  loss  of  that 
wealth  even  after  he  has  become  a  monk  and  given  up  the  idea 
of  being  wealthy.  From  the  fact  that  a  man  wearing  an  ear-ring 
had  been  seen  to  be  happy  by  thinking  of  himself  as  the  pos¬ 
sessor  of  that  ear-ring,  it  does  not  follow  that  he  will  have  that 
very  happiness  arising  from  the  possession  of  an  ear-ring  even 
after  he  dissociates  himself  from  that  ear-ring  and  gives  up  the 
idea  of  his  being  its  possessor.  Thus  it  is  stated  in  the  Vedic 
text,  “Happiness  and  sorrow  do  not  touch  one  who  has  become 
definitely  unembodied”80  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  1). 

Opponent :  Suppose  we  argue  that  this  unembodiedness  comes 
when  the  body  falls,  but  it  cannot  be  so  for  a  living  man. 

Veddntin :  Not  so,  for  the  idea  of  embodiedness  is  a  result  of 
false  nescience.  Unless  it  be  through  the  false  ignorance  of 
identifying  the  Self  with  the  body,  there  can  be  no  embodied¬ 
ness  for  the  Self.  And  we  said  that  the  unembodiedness  of  the 
Self  is  eternal,  since  it  is  not  a  product  of  action. 

Opponent ;  May  it  not  be  that  embodiedness  is  the  result  of 
the  virtuous  and  vicious  deeds  done  by  the  Self? 

Veddntin :  No.  There  can  be  no  performance  of  virtuous  and 
vicious  deeds  by  the  Self,  since  it  cannot  be  proved  that  It  has 
any  relation  with  the  body.  Since  the  assertion  of  the  relation 
of  the  Self  with  the  body  (as  the  cause  of  virtue  and  vice)  and 

“Sorrow  is  destroyed  not  by  mediate  but  by  immediate  knowledge.  If 
one  does  not  get  immediate  knowledge  from  the  Upani$ads,  not  lung  is 
wrong  with  them,  but  it  is  caused  by  the  imperfect  state  of  the  hearer’s 
mind. 


Li. 4]  BRAHMA  - SCTRA  - BHA§YA  41 

the  creation  of  that  relation  by  virtue  and  vice  leads  to  an 
argument  in  a  circle,  therefore  it  is  but  blind  tradition  that  makes 
one  stand  by  such  an  eternal  chain.  Besides,  the  Self  can  have 
no  agentship  (of  virtue  and  vice),  since  It  is  unrelated  to  work.81 

Opponent :  Have  not  kings  and  others  an  agentship  by  their 
mere  proximity? 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  their  agentship  can  be  explained  as  result¬ 
ing  from  the  relation  established  with  the  servants  through 
payment  of  wealth  etc.  But  no  such  cause  for  any  relationship 
of  either  self-identity  with  or  ownership  of  (the  body)  can  be 
imagined  for  the  Self,  that  can  compare  with  the  relationship 
between  the  master  and  servant  achieved  through  payment  of 
money  etc.,  while  false  self-identity  is  directly  perceived  as  a 
cause  (for  the  Selfs  relation  with  body  and  action).  Hereby  is 
explained  how  the  Self  can  become  a  sacrificer  (through  false 
self-identification) . 

Opponent :  With  regard  to  this,  they  (i.e.  followers  of 
Prabhakara)  say:  It  may  be  argued  that  the  Self,  though  in 
fact  different  from  the  body  etc.  has  self-identification  with 
the  body  etc.  in  a  secondary  sense  (owing  to  some  common 
property);  but  this  is  not  false. 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  it  is  well  known  that  words  and  ideas 
can  have  primary  and  secondary  senses  only  to  a  man  to  whom 
the  differences  of  the  things  etc.  are  evident.  To  a  person  to 
whom  the  differences  of  things  are  obvious — as  for  instance, 
when  he  knows  it  well  enough  through  the  methods  of  agree¬ 
ment  and  difference  that  there  exists  a  distinct  animal  possessing 
manes  and  distinctive  features  denoted  by  the  word  lion  in  the 
primary  sense,  and  that  there  is  a  man  known  to  be  possessed 
abundantly  of  such  qualities  of  a  lion  as  cruelty  and  bravery — 
then  to  such  a  person  the  application  of  the  word  lion  and  its 
idea  become  possible  in  a  secondary  sense,  but  not  so  to  one  to 

81  The  argument  in  a  circle  can  be  avoided  on  the  analogy  of  the  seed 
and  the  sprout — the  merits  of  a  previous  birth  can  produce  the  experiences 
of  the  next  birth  and  vice  versa.  But  this  leads  to  an  unjustifiable  infinite 
regress;  for  the  relation  of  the  seed  and  sprout  is  a  perceived  reality, 
whereas  the  relation  of  merit  etc.  with  the  Self,  which  is  unattached,  is 
fanciful. 


42  BRAHMA- SuTRA  -13HASYA  [I.i.4 

whom  the  differences  of  the  two  beings  nre  not  apparent.  In 
the  latter  case,  the  application  of  words  and  ideas  to  things  other 
than  those  implied  by  them  is  not  figurative;  rather  it  must  be 
the  result  of  ignorance.  In  light  darkness,  the  word  man  and  its 
idea  are  applied  to  the  stump  of  a  tree  when  it  is  not  distinctly 
cognized  as  ‘‘This  is  a  stump”,  or  the  word  silver  and  its  idea 
are  applied  all  of  a  sudden  to  nacre.  Similarly  when  the  word 
“I”  and  its  idea  are  suddenly  applied  in  a  literal  sense  to  the 
aggregate  of  body  and  senses  owing  to  a  non-discrimination 
between  the  Self  and  non-Self,  how  can  this  be  said  to  be 
figurative?  It  is  seen  that  even  the  learned,  who  know  the 
distinction  between  the  Self  and  the  non-Self,  use  words  and 
have  ideas  implying  a  non-distinction  (between  Self  and  non- 
Self),  just  like  the  (ignorant)  shepherds  and  goat-herds.  There¬ 
fore  the  idea  of  “I”  with  regard  to  the  body  etc.,  entertained 
by  those  who  believe  (from  mediate  knowledge)  in  a  Self, 
distinct  from  the  body  etc.,  must  be  false  and  not  figurative. 
Thus  since  embodiedness  is  the  result  of  a  false  perception,  it 
is  established  that  the  enlightened  man  has  no  embodiedness 
even  while  living.  Thus  about  the  knower  of  Brahman  occurs 
this  Vedic  text,  “Just  as  the  lifeless  slough  of  a  snake  is  cast 
off  and  it  lies  in  the  ant-hill,  so  does  this  body  lie.  Then  the  Self 
becomes  disembodied  and  immortal,  becomes  the  Prana  (i.c. 
living),  Brahman,  the  (self-effulgent)  Light”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  7),  as 
also,  “Though  without  eyes,  he  appears  as  if  possessed  of  eyes; 
though  without  ears,  he  appears  as  if  possessed  of  ears;  though 
without  speech,  he  appears  as  if  possessed  of  speech;  though 
without  mind,  he  appears  as  though  possessed  of  mind;  though 
without  vital  force,  he  appears  as  though  possessed  of  vital 
force.”82  There  is  also  the  Smrti  text  starting  with,  “What  is 
the  description  of  the  man  of  steady  knowledge,  merged  in 
SamadhiV ’  (Gita,  II.  54),  which  while  setting  forth  the  charac¬ 
teristic  of  a  man  of  steady  (well-poised)  wisdom,  reveals  that  in 
the  case  of  an  enlightened  man  there  is  a  total  absence  of  any 

“Through  a  reappearance  of  what  is  sublated  by  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman,  like  the  repetition  of  a  mirage  after  being  known  to  be  false  or 
the  continuance  of  the  semblance  of  a  cloth  produced  by  the  burnt  yams 
still  in  position. 


I.  i.4] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


43 


connection  with  any  impulsion  to  work.  Hence  a  man  who  has 
realized  his  own  identity  with  Brahman  cannot  continue  to 
have  the  worldly  state  just  as  before,  whereas  the  man  who 
continues  to  have  the  worldly  state  just  as  before  has  not 
realized  his  identity  with  Brahman.  Thus83  it  is  all  beyond 
criticism. 

And  it  was  stated  that  from  the  mention  of  reflection  and 
profound  meditation  ( nididhyasana )  after  hearing  (i.e.  under¬ 
standing  of  Upani$adic  texts — Bf.  II.  iv.  5),  it  follows  that  Brah¬ 
man  is  complementary  to  some  injunction,  and  Its  knowledge 
is  not  meant  for  culminating  in  a  realization  of  Its  own  nature. 
That  is  no  valid  objection,  for  reflection  and  profound  medita¬ 
tion  (just  like  hearing)  are  meant  for  giving  rise  to  immediate 
knowledge.  If  Brahman  had  been  known  through  some  other 
source  of  knowledge  and  then  used  in  some  other  act  or  medita¬ 
tion,  then  It  could  have  become  a  part  of  an  injunction.  But 
that  is  not  the  case.  For  just  like  hearing,  reflection  and  medita¬ 
tion  are  also  meant  for  knowledge.84  Hence  it  cannot  be  that 
Brahman  is  known  from  the  scriptures  as  a  factor  included  in 
any  injunction  about  worshipful  meditation  ( upasand ).  Accord¬ 
ingly,  it  stands  established  that  Brahman  is  presented  as  an 
independent  entity  in  the  scriptures;  for  as  a  result  of  the  proper 
determination  of  the  Upani§adic  texts,  they  are  seen  to 
speak  of  It.  And  from  this  point  of  view,  the  commencement 
of  a  separate  scriptural  text  about  that  Brahman  with  the 
aphorism,  “Hence  (is  to  be  undertaken)  thereafter  a  deliberation 
on  Brahman”  (B.  S.  Li.  1)  is  justified.  If,  however,  Brahman 

“Since  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  useful  like  the  useful  knowledge, 
“This  is  a  rope  and  not  a  snake”. 

84  Reflection  and  profound  meditation  are  enjoined  for  one  who  does 
not  realize  from  the  first  hearing.  This  is  owing  to  his  own  mental 
defects.  The  illumination  dawns  when  there  is  no  defect.  By  hearing  is 
removed  the  doubt  from  an  unprepared  mind  that  the  Upanisads  cannot 
impart  the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  Reflection  removes  the  doubt  that 
the  Self  and  Brahman  cannot  be  one.  Through  meditation  the  mind  is 
withdrawn  from  distraction  and  all  things  other  than  Brahman,  and  thru 
Brahman  stands  revealed.  Thus  hearing  etc.  generate  knowledge,  and 
knowledge  brings  liberation.  Reflection  and  meditation  deal  with  dm 
thing  known  from  hearing.  They  are  not  meant  for  a  fresh  knowledge. 


44  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  i.  4 

were  to  be  presented  as  complementary  to  an  injunction  about 
worshipful  meditation  ( upasana ),  then  since  this  had  been 
already  started  with  in  the  aphorism,  “Hence  thereafter  is 
commenced  an  inquiry  into  virtuous  deeds”  (Jai.  Su.  I.  i.  1), 
a  separate  scripture  should  not  have  been  begun.  Or  even  if  it 
were  commenced,  it  should  have  been  begun  with,  “Hence 
thereafter  is  commenced  a  deliberation  on  virtuous  deeds  (i.e. 
worshipful  meditation  on  Brahman)  that  had  been  left  over  (by 
Jaimini)”,  like  the  aphorism,  “Hence  thereafter  (i.e.  after 
determining  what  are  the  primary  and  subsidiary  factors)  is 
commenced  a  deliberation  on  things  conducive  to  the  perform¬ 
ance  of  sacrifices  and  attainment  of  human  objectives”85  (Jai. 
Su.  IV.  i.  1).  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  knowledge  of  the 
unity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self  was  not  premised  (in  Jaimini’s 
book);  therefore  the  commencement  of  this  book  for  that 
purpose  with  the  aphorism,  “Hence  thereafter  is.  undertaken  a 
deliberation  on  Brahman”,  is  justifiable.  Accordingly,  all  these 
injunctions  as  well  as  all  the  other  means  of  knowledge  have 
their  validity  till  the  realization,  “I  am  Brahman”.  For  once  the 
non-dual  Self,  that  is  neither  acceptable  nor  rejectable,  is 
realized,  there  can  be  no  possibility  of  the  persistence  of  the 
means  of  knowledge  that  become  bereft  of  their  objects  and 
subjects.80  Moreover,  they  (the  knowers  of  Brahman)  say, 
“When  on  the  realization  of  the  Existence-Brahman  as  I,  the 
body,  son,  etc.  become  sublated  and  consequently  the  secondary 
and  false  selves  cease  to  exist,  how  can  there  be  any  action 
(prompted  by  injunction  and  prohibition)?  The  Self  can  be  a 
knowing  agent  earlier  than  the  rise  of  the  complete  knowledge 
of  Brahman  that  has  to  be  sought  for;  but  (when  that  search 
has  been  finished),  the  knower,  freed  from  the  defect  of  sin, 
becomes  one  with  the  entity  arrived  at  through  the  search. 
Just  as  the  ideas  of  the  body  as  the  Self  are  accepted  by  the  wise 
as  valid  postulates  (for  empirical  dealings),  similarly  these 


83  Since  such  a  determination  clears  the  way  for  an  inquiry  about  things 
conducive  to  sacrifices  and  human  objectives,  therefore  the  second  inquiry 
starts  after  the  first. 

“The  means  of  knowledge  are  valid  so  long  as  the  final  illumination 
does  not  occur. 


I.  i.  5  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  45 

empirical  means  of  knowledge  are  accepted  as  valid  till  the 
direct  knowledge  of  the  Self  dawns”  ( Sundarapandya-karika ). 

Topic  5:  The  First  Cause  Possessed  of  Consciousness 

Thus  it  has  been  said  that  the  Upani$adic  texts  are  meant  for 
imparting  the  knowledge  of  Brahman;  that  when  their  meaning 
is  fully  ascertained,  they  have  the  Self,  which  is  Brahman,  as 
their  fullest  import;  and  that  they  culminate  in  (the  knowledge 
of)  Brahman  even  without  any  connection  with  an  action.  It 
has  also  been  said  that  the  omniscient  and  omnipotent  Brahman 
is  the  cause  of  the  origin,  continuance,  and  dissolution  of  the 
universe.  But  the  Samkhyas  and  others  hold  the  view  that  a 
pre-existing  entity  can  be  known  through  other  means  (apart 
from  the  Upanisads).  Inferring  Pradhana  (primordial  Nature) 
and  other  entities  as  the  source  of  the  universe,  they  construe 
the  texts  of  the  Upanisads  as  pointing  to  these  only.  They  also 
think  that  in  all  the  Upanisads,  dealing  with  creation,  the  cause 
is  sought  to  be  presented  through  the  effect  with  the  help  of 
inference.87  They  further  hold  that  the  contacts  between  the 
sentient  souls  (Puru§as)  and  Pradhana  can  always  be  inferred.88 
Again  from  these  very  texts,  the  followers  of  Kanada  infer  God 
as  the  efficient  cause  and  the  atoms  as  the  material  cause. 
Similarly  there  are  other  logicians  (viz  Buddhists  and  others) 
who  stand  up  here  in  opposition  with  garbled  quotations89  and 
sophistry  as  their  mainstay.  That  being  the  case,  the  teacher 
(Vyasa),  who  is  versed  in  the  valid  imports  of  words  and 
sentences,  refutes  the  diverse  ideas  based  on  garbled  quotations 
and  sophistry  by  placing  these  in  opposition,  so  as  to  prove  that 
the  texts  of  the  Upanisads  aim  at  imparting  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman. 

Now  among  these,  the  Samkhayas  think  that  the  insentient 

87  For  instance,  “O  amiable  one,  try  to  find  out  Existence  as  the  root 
(of  all)  with  the  help  of  Its  product  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  4). 

“From  the  common  experience  that  all  things  are  the  products  of 
insentient  Nature,  and  that  insentient  things  remain  associated  with  sentient 
beings,  as  for  instance,  a  chariot. 

80 “In  the  beginning  there  was  non-existence  only”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  and 
so  on. 


46  BRAHMA- SUTRA -BHA5YA  [I.i. 5 

Pradhana,  comprising  its  three  constituents  ( gunas — Sattva , 
Rajas ,  and  Tomas),  is  the  cause  of  the  universe.  They  say,  “The 
Upanisadic  texts,  which  according  to  you  (Vedantin)  reveal 
an  omnipotent  and  omniscient  Brahman  as  the  cause  of  the 
universe,  can  be  understood  equally  well  to  imply  that  Pradhana 
is  the  cause  of  the  universe.  As  for  omnipotence,  Pradhana  can 
also  have  it  well  enough  in  respect  of  its  own  modifications; 
similarly  omniscience  also  is  logical.” 

How? 

Samkhya  :  That  which  you  consider  to  be  knowledge  is  a 
characteristic  of  Sattva ,  as  is  proved  from  the  Smfti,  “Know  - 
ledge  springs  from  Sattva ”  (Gita,  XIV.  17).  And  the  Yogins, 
possessed  of  body  and  senses,  are  well  known  to  be  omniscient 
by  virtue  of  their  knowledge  that  is  a  characteristic  of  Sattva , 
it  being  a  familiar  fact  that  omniscience  follows  from  the  highest 
perfection  of  Sattva .  For  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  the  attrib¬ 
uteless,  all-pervasive  entity  (Purusa),  that  is  mere  consciousness 
without  a  body  and  senses,  can  have  any  knowledge  of  either 
all  things  or  a  few.  But  Pradhana,  comprising  its  three  constitu¬ 
ents,  has  Sattva ,  the  source  of  all  knowledge,  even  in  its  (own 
primordial)  state  of  Pradhana  (i.e.  balance  of  the  three  constitu¬ 
ents)  ;  and  therefore  omniscience  in  a  secondary  sense  is  declared 
in  the  Upani§adic  texts  for  this  Pradhana  even  though  it  is 
insentient.  In  postulating  omniscience  for  Brahman,  it  has  to  be 
admitted  even  by  you  that  Brahman  becomes  omniscient  by  Its 
potentiality  to  know  everything.  Not  that  Brahman  stands  there 
actually  knowing  all  things  for  all  times.  For  on  the  assumption 
that  Brahman’s  knowledge  is  eternal,  Its  independence  with 
regard  to  the  act  of  knowing  will  be  compromised.  On  the 
contrary,  if  the  act  of  knowing  be  impermanent,  Brahman  will 
cease  to  exist  when  the  act  of  knowing  ceases  (or  “may  cease 
from  the  act  of  knowing” — according  to  another  reading).  That 
being  the  case,  the  conclusion  that  emerges  is  that  omniscience 
follows  from  the  potentiality  to  know  everything.  Bur  your 
standpoint  is  that  Brahman  is  devoid  of  any  accessory  before 
creation.  It  is  not,  however,  logical  that  anyone  should  have 
any  knowledge  even  in  the  absence  of  body,  senses,  etc.  More¬ 
over,  modifications  are  possible  for  Pradhana  that  is  composite 


I.i.  5] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHASYA 


47 


by  nature,  so  that  it  can  reasonably  become  a  material  cause 
like  earth  etc.,  whereas  Brahman,  which  is  uniform  by  nature 
and  non-composite,  can  have  no  modification. 

Vedantin :  As  against  such  a  contention,  this  aphorism  is 
advanced: 


II  *.  n 

(The  Pradhana  of  the  Samkhyas  is)  ^  not  (the  cause  of 
the  universe),  (because  it  is)  3^1®^  not  mentioned  in  the 
Upanisads,  (which  fact  is  clear)  from  the  fact  of  seeing 

(or  deliberation). 

5.  The  Pradhana  of  the  Samkhyas  is  not  the  cause  of  the 
universe ,  because  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Upanisads ,  which 
fact  is  clear  from  the  fact  of  seeing  (or  thinking). 

In  the  Upani$adic  texts  one  cannot  take  one’s  stand  on  the 
insentient  Pradhana  imagined  by  the  Samkhyas  as  the  cause  of 
the  universe;  for  it  is  not  presented  in  the  Upanisads. 

How  is  it  not  presented  in  the  Upanisads? 

On  account  of  the  fact  of  seeing.90 

How? 

The  Upanisads  teach  thus:  Starting  with  the  text,  “O  amiable 
one,  before  its  creation,  the  universe  was  but  Existence 
(Brahman),  one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  it  is  stated, 
“That  (Brahman)  visualized,  ‘I  shall  become  many,  I  shall  be 
born.’  That  (Brahman)  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3).  In  that 
text,  the  universe,  manifested  as  names  and  forms  and  referable 
by  the  word  “it”,  is  first  ascertained  to  be  identified  with  Exist¬ 
ence  “before  its  creation”;  then  the  text  shows  that  the  creator- 
ship  of  fire  etc.,  that  follows  the  visualization  of  future  creation, 
belongs  to  that  very  entity,  called  Existence,  which  is  under 
consideration.  So  also  elsewhere:  “In  the  beginning  this  universe 
was  but  the  one  Self  alone;  there  was  nothing  else  whatsoever 
that  winked.  He  visualized,  ‘Let  me  create  the  worlds’  ”  (Ai.  I. 

00  Also  translated  as  “thinking”,  “knowledge”,  “vision”,  “wish”  (see 
I.  iii.  13). 


48 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.i.  5 


i.  1-2),  the  text  speaks  of  creation  after  visualization.  At  some 
place  the  text  declares  thus  after  introducing  the  Puru$a  with 
sixteen  limbs:91  “He  visualized,  he  created  the  vital  force” 
(Pr.  VI.  3-4).  By  the  word  ik$ati  the  (cognate)  noun  implied 
by  the  verb  (i.e.  seeing)  is  sought  to  be  indicated,  as  is  the  case 
with  the  word  yajati ,92  and  not  the  root  itself  (i.e.  to  see).  As 
a  result,  one  can  refer  to  the  following  texts  and  such  others 
which  have  for  their  import  the  omniscient  God  as  the  cause 
(of  the  universe):  “From  Him  who  is  omniscient  in  general  and 
in  detail,  whose  austerity  (i.e.  creative  effort)  is  constituted  by 
knowledge,  emerged  this  Brahman  (viz  Hiragyagarbha)  as  well 
as  name,  form,  and  food”  (Mu.  I.  i.  9). 

As  for  the  statement  that  Pradhana  can  become  omniscient 
through  the  characteristic  of  knowledge  belonging  to  its  con¬ 
stituent  Sattva,  that  is  not  justifiable;  for  in  that  state  (of 
Pradhana  as  such,  when  it  has  not  changed  through  a  loss  of 
balance)  there  can  be  no  possibility  of  knowledge  as  a  charac¬ 
teristic  of  Sattva ,  because  the  constituents  of  Pradhana  are  then 
in  balance. 

Samkhya :  Was  it  not  stated  that  Pradhana  can  become 
omniscient  by  virtue  of  its  potentiality  for  knowing  all? 

Vedmtm :  That  too  cannot  be  proved.  If  during  the  state  of 
equilibrium  of  the  constituents,  Pradhana  is  said  to  be  all¬ 
knowing  by  virtue  of  having  the  power  to  know  that  actually 
belongs  to  Sattva ,  then  it  can  equally  be  said  to  have  little 
knowledge  on  account  of  having  the  power  of  obstruction  to 
knowledge  that  belongs  to  Rajas  and  Tamas.  Besides,  so  long  as 
Sattva  is  not  illumined  by  the  consciousness  (of  the  witnessing 
soul),  no  change  in  Sattva  can  be  called  knowledge;  and  insen¬ 
tient  Pradhana  has  no  power  to  illumine.  Therefore  the  omnisci¬ 
ence  of  Pradhana  is  not  justifiable.  The  all-knowingness  of  the 
Yogins  cannot  be  quoted  as  an  example,  for  they  are  conscious 
beings,  so  that  they  can  become  all-knowing  through  a  perfec¬ 
tion  of  their  Sattva.  If  on  the  analogy  of  a  heated  lump  of  iron, 

01  Vital  force,  faith,  space,  air,  fire,  water,  earth,  organs  and  senses, 
mind,  food,  vigour,  austerity,  mantras ,  works,  worlds,  name. 

02  Used  by  Jaimini  in  his  aphorism  VII.  iv.  1,  where  yajati  figuratively 
means  a  sacrifice  and  not  the  mere  root  “to  sacrifice”. 


I.i.  5] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


49 


burning  something  because  of  the  fire  in  it,  it  be  argued  that 
Pradhana  has  the  power  of  seeing  owing  to  the  presence  of  a 
witnessing  entity,  then  it  is  but  logical  to  hold  that  the  entity, 
owing  to  which  Pradhana  has  the  power  to  visualize,  is  none 
other  than  the  omniscient  Brahman,  and  That  is  the  cause  of 
the  universe. 

Again,  it  has  been  argued  that  even  Brahman  cannot  have 
omniscience  in  the  primary  sense,  for  if  It  is  an  eternal  knower. 
It  cannot  have  any  independence  as  regards  the  act  of  knowing. 
The  answer  to  this  is:  Now  then,  you  have  to  be  asked,  sir, 
“How  can  one  lose  one’s  omniscience  owing  to  one’s  possession 
of  the  act  of  knowing  for  ever?”93  It  is  a  contradiction  to  assert 
that  one  has  eternally  the  knowledge  that  is  capable  of  revealing 
everything,  and  yet  one  is  not  omniscient.  For  should  knowledge 
be  non-eternal,  one  may  know  sometimes  and  sometimes  not, 
so  that  one  may  as  well  become  non-omniscient.  But  this  defect 
does  not  arise  if  knowledge  is  eternal.94 

Savikhya  :  If  knowledge  be  eternal,  any  mention  of  independ¬ 
ence  about  knowing  becomes  illogical. 

Veddntin  :  No,  for  even  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  possessed  of 
continuous  heat  and  light,  independence  of  action  is  seen  to  be 
asserted  by  saying,  “The  sun  burns”,  “The  sun  shines”. 

Scbiikhya  :  It  is  only  when  the  sun  comes  into  contact  with 
things  to  be  burnt  or  illumined  that  one  says,  “It  burns,  it  lights 
up”.  But  Brahman  has  no  contact  with  any  object  of  knowledge 
before  creation;  hence  the  illustration  is  inapt. 

Vedautin  :  No,  for  even  in  the  absence  of  any  object,  it  is 
said,  “The  sun  shines”,  thereby  ascribing  agency  to  the  sun. 
Similarly,  even  though  Brahman  had  no  object  of  knowledge, 
it  is  reasonable  to  ascribe  agentship  to  It  by  saying,  “It  saw” 
Hence  there  is  no  inaptitude.  If,  however,  the  need  of  supplying 
an  object  (for  the  transitive  verb  “to  know”)  arises,  the  Vedic 


03 The  objection  may  mean  either,  (i)  Brahman  has  no  eternal  con¬ 
sciousness,  or  (ii)  Brahman  does  nor  know  eternally.  The  next  two 
sentences  give  the  answers. 

w  Omniscience  and  knowing  do  not  conflict,  since  omniscience  can 
express  itself  through  the  acts  of  knowing. 

4 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


50 


[I.i.  5 


texts  speaking  of  “seeing”  by  Brahman  become  all  the  more 
logical. 

Samkhya :  What  are  those  objects  which  form  the  content  of 
God’s  knowledge  before  creation? 

Vedantin  :  We  say  that  they  are  the  unmanifested  name  and 
form  which  cannot  be  referred  to  either  as  different  or  non- 
different  from  Brahman,  and  which  are  about  to  become  mani¬ 
fested.55  It  goes  without  saying  that  the  eternally  pure  God 
is  ever  possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  creation,  continuance,  and 
dissolution;  for  it  is  held  by  the  adepts  in  the  Yoga  scriptures 
that  the  Yogins  get  their  direct  knowledge  about  the  past  and 
the  future  out  of  His  grace. 

The  further  objection  was  raised  that,  since  Brahman  has  no 
body  etc.  before  creation,  no  seeing  is  possible  for  It.  That 
objection  can  hardly  be  raised;  for  like  the  effulgence  of  the 
sun,  Brahman  has  eternal  consciousness  by  Its  very  nature,  so 
that  It  has  no  dependence  on  the  means  of  knowledge.  More¬ 
over,  in  the  case  of  a  transmigrating  soul,  subject  to  ignorance, 
the  rise  of  knowledge  depends  on  body  etc.,  but  not  so  in  the 
case  of  God  whose  knowledge  is  free  from  obstacles.  x\nd  thus 
it  is  that  the  following  two  mantras  show  how  God  is  not 
dependent  on  body  etc.,  and  how  His  knowledge  has  no 
covering:  “He  has  no  body  and  no  organ;  none  is  seen  to  be 
either  equal  or  superior  to  Him.  The  Vedas  speak  of  His 
diverse  supreme  powers  as  also  of  His  spontaneous  action  that 
is  accomplished  by  His  vigour  arising  from  knowledge”50  (Sv. 
VI.  8);  “Without  hands  and  feet  He  grasps  and  moves 
quickly;  he  sees  without  eyes,  hears  without  ears.  He  knows 
(all)  that  is  to  be  known,  but  none  can  know  Him.  Him  they 
call  the  first,  the  great,  and  the  all-pervasive  Entity”  (Sv.  III.  19). 


“In  the  beginning,  Brahman’s  limiting  adjunct  Maya  undergoes  a  change 
conducive  to  creation.  The  causes  that  had  brought  about  the  dissolution 
become  exhausted  then,  thus  clearing  the  way  for  the  creative  tendency 
inherent  in  Maya.  And  Brahman  then  visualizes  all  the  future  objects 
that  lie  buried  in  Maya  in  a  subtle  form.  That  being  an  act  and  the 
objects  of  vision  being  present*  God  is  an  agent  in  the  primary  sense. 

86  The  vigour  of  knowledge — the  clear  reflection  of  Consciousness  on 
the  transformation  of  Maya. 


I.i.  5] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


51 


Sdmkhya :  From  your  point  of  view  there  can  be  no  soul, 
distinct  from  God,  which  can  transmigrate  and  whose  know  - 
ledge  can  have  limitations,  for  the  Vedic  text  says,  “There 
is  no  other  witness  but  Him, ...  no  other  knower  but  Him” 
(Br.  in.  vii.  23).  So  what  do  you  mean  by  asserting  that  for 
a  soul  under  bondage,  the  rise  of  knowledge  depends  on  body 
etc.,  but  not  so  in  the  case  of  God? 

Vedantin :  As  to  that,  our  answer  is:  Really  speaking,  there 
is  no  soul  under  bondage  and  different  from  God.  Still  just  like 
the  association  of  space  with  such  conditioning  factors  as  pots, 
jars,  caves  of  mountains,  etc.,  it  is  assumed  that  God  has  associa¬ 
tion  with-  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  body  etc.  And  people  are 
seen  to  use  words  and  ideas  based  on  that  association,  as  for 
instance,  “The  space  in  a  pot”,  “The  space  in  a  jar”,  and  so 
on,  though  these  are  non-different  from  space.  And  it  is  seen 
that  by  that  association  are  created  in  space  such  false  notions 
of  difference  as  “The  space  within  a  pot”.  Similarly  in  the  case 
under  consideration,  the  idea  of  difference  between  God  and  a 
transmigrating  soul  is  false,  it  having  been  created  by  non¬ 
discrimination  (i.e.  ignorance)  which  causes  the  ascription  of 
the  limiting  adjuncts — body  and  the  rest.  And  though  the  Self 
(as  a  distinct  entity)  continues  as  before,  It  is  seen  to  remain 
falsely  identified  with  the  body  and  the  rest,  the  identification 
having  arisen  from  a  series  of  errors  preceding  each  other. 
Granted  such  a  state  of  bondage,  it  stands  to  reason  that  the 
transmigrating  soul  should  depend  on  body  etc.  for  its  acts  of 
seeing. 

And  the  argument  was  advanced  that  Pradhana  can  be  the 
(material)  cause  like  clay  etc.,  since  it  is  a  composite  thing,  but 
not  so  the  non-composite  Brahman;  that  was  demolished  by  the 
fact  that  Pradhana  is  outside  the  Vedic  pale.  How  even  logic 
establishes  the  causality  of  Brahman,  and  not  that  of  Pradhana 
etc.,  will  be  elaborated  under  the  aphorisms  starting  with,  “It  is 
not  so,  for  its  characteristics  are  different”97  (II.  i.  4). 

(The  Sawikhyas)  enter  a  protest  here:  As  for  the  assertion 


07  Brahman  is  not  the  material  cause  of  the  universe,  since  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  the  universe  are  different  from  those  of  Brahman. 


52  BRAHMA- SUTRA -BHA5YA  [I.i.5 

that  the  insentient  Pradhana  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  universe 
in  the  face  of  the  Vedic  reference  to  the  fact  of  visualizing, 
that  can  be  explained  from  another  point  of  view;  for  in 
common  parlance  even  an  insentient  thing  is  referred  to 
figuratively  as  sentient.  As  for  instance,  it  is  a  matter  of 
experience  that  on  noticing  the  bank  of  a  river  on  the  point 
of  collapsing,  they  say,  “The  bank  is  about  (lit.  “wishes”)  to 
fall”,  where  sentience  is  ascribed  to  the  insentient  bank.  Simi¬ 
larly  with  regard  to  Pradhana,  from  which  creation  is  imminent, 
there  may  be  a  figurative  ascription  of  sentience  by  saying,  “It 
saw”.  Just  as  somebody  in  ordinary  life  first  plans  thus,  “I  shall 
bathe,  and  then  eat,  and  go  to  the  village  in  the  afternoon  by 
riding  on  a  chariot”,  and  having  planned  thus,  he  acts  in  that 
order,  so  also  Pradhana  transforms  itself  as  Mahat  and  the  rest 
in  a  regular  order,  so  as  to  be  referred  to  figuratively  as  a 
sentient  entity. 

Objection  :  Why,  again,  should  the  seeing  in  the  primary 
sense  be  discarded  in  favour  of  a  secondary  one? 

Sdmkhya  :  Because  the  figurative  use  of  sentience  is  noticed 
in  the  cases  of  insentient  things  like  water  and  fire  in  such 
sentences  as,  “That  fire  saw  (or  thought)”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3), 
“These  waters  saw”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  4).  Therefore  from  the  fact 
of  occurring  in  a  context  of  secondary  uses  (in  Ch.  VI.  ii.  2-4), 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  “seeing”  by  Existence  (which  is 
but  another  name  for  Pradhana)  is  spoken  of  in  a  secondary 
sense. 

Veddntin :  This  contingency  having  arisen,  an  aphorism  is 
presented  here: 


J|>I^WIc^l<*;R[  II  \  II 

If  it  be  argued,  (that  the  “seeing”  is)  jftur:  in  a  secondary 
sense,  then  ^  it  is  not  so,  3nc*r*5T«^[  owing  to  the  use  of  the 
word  Self. 

6 .  If  it  be  argued  that  the  seeing  is  in  a  secondary  sense,  we 
say ,  not  so,  owing  to  the  use  of  the  word  Self. 

The  assertion  is  wrong  that  the  insentient  Pradhana  is  referred 


Li. 6]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  - BHA$YA  53 

to  by  the  word  Existence  and  that  “seeing  is  ascribed  to  it  in  a 
secondary  sense  just  as  in  the  cases  of  water  and  fire”. 

Why? 

“Owing  to  the  use  of  the  word  Self.”  After  the  introductory 
sentence,  “O  amiable  one,  this  universe,  before  its  creation,  was 
but  Existence”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  the  creation  of  fire,  water,  and 

earth  is  stated  in,  “It  saw - It  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3). 

And  then  the  text  refers  to  that  very  seeing  Existence  as  well 
as  those  fire,  earth,  and  water  by  the  word  “deity”,  and  the 
text  says,  “That  Deity,  that  is  such,  saw  (or  thought),  ‘Now 
then  let  me  manifest  name  and  form  by  Myself  entering  into 
these  three  deities  as  the  jiva  (individual  soul)  that  is  but  (My) 
Self’”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2).  Now,  if  insentient  Pradhana  had  been 
imagined  to  be  the  seer  in  some  secondary  sense,  then  Pradhana 
being  the  entity  under  discussion,  it  should  have  been  alluded  to 
by  the  text,  “That  Deity  that  is  such”.  But  in  that  case  the 
Deity  would  not  call  the  individual  soul  His  own  Self.  For 
from  usage  and  derivation  the  word  jiva  (the  individual  soul) 
means  that  which  lives  (i.e.  has  sentience),  controls  the  body, 
and  holds  together  the  organs  and  senses.  How  can  that  soul 
be  the  Self  of  the  insentient  Pradhana?  For  the  Self  is  the  same 
as  one’s  very  essence.  The  insentient  Pradhana  cannot  certainly 
have  the  sentient  soul  as  its  very  essence.  On  the  contrary,  if 
Brahman,  that  is  Consciousness,  is  accepted  as  the  seer  in  the 
primary  sense,  Its  use  of  the  word  Self  with  reference  to  the 
individual  soul  becomes  justifiable.  So  also  is  the  case  with  the 
text,  “That  (Existence)  which  is  this  (extremely)  subtle  thing, 
is  the  Self  of  all  this  (universe).  That  is  Reality;  That  is  the 
Self.  That  thou  art,  O  Svetaketu”  (Ch.  VI.  vii.  8).  By  saying, 
“That  is  the  Self”,  that  text  presents  that  Reality,  that  subtle 
Self,  as  the  Self  under'  consideration,  and  then  in  the  text, 
“That  thou  art,  O  Svctakctu”,  occurs  the  instruction  about 
It  as  the  Self  of  the  conscious  being  Svetaketu.  But  the  “seeing” 
in  the  case  of  water  and  fire  is  secondary,  since  they  are 
insentient  inasmuch  as  they  are  objects  of  perception.  Besides, 
they  are  mentioned  as  factors  employed  in  the  manifestation 
of  name  and  form.  Moreover,  there  is  nothing  like  the  word 
Self  in  their  case  to  make  their  “seeing”  a  possibility  in  the 


54  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  i.  6 

primary  sense.  Hence  it  is  reasonable  that  the  “seeing”  by  them 
should  be  secondary  as  in  the  case  of  (the  falling)  of  the  bank 
of  a  river.  Or  the  “seeing”  by  them  too  may  be  in  the  primary 
sense,  this  being  possible  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  Reality 
forming  their  basis.  But  we  pointed  out  that  the  “seeing”  by 
Reality  is  not  secondary  because  of  the  use  of  the  word  Self. 

Samkhya  :  It  may,  however,  be  held  that  the  word  Self  can 
be  applied  even  to  the  insentient  Pradhana,  for  it  performs 
everything  for  the  Self.  This  is  just  like  using  the  word  Self  in 
such  an  expression  as,  “Bhadrasena  is  my  Self”,  by  a  king  in 
respect  of  a  servant  doing  everything  for  him.  As  an  officer 
serves  a  king  by  engaging  himself  in  making  peace,  waging  war, 
etc.,  so  Pradhana  serves  the  Self,  the  all-pervasive  conscious 
Entity,  by  arranging  emancipation  and  enjoyment  for  It.  Or 
the  same  word  Self  can  mean  both  sentient  and  insentient 
things,  for  such  expressions  are  used  in  common  parlance  as, 
“The  elements  themselves”,  “The  organs  themselves”,  (“The 
supreme  Self”),  etc.,  just  as  much  as  the  same  word  “ jyotis ” 
(fire)  is  used  for  a  sacrifice  as  well  as  fire.  So  how  can  it  be 
inferred  from  the  use  of  the  word  “Self”  that  “seeing”  is  not 
applied  in  a  secondary  sense? 

Veddntin  :  Therefore  the  answer  is  being  given: 

afatwy  ii  \9  ii 

Because  liberation  is  taught  for  one 

devoted  to  That. 

7.  (Pradhana  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  word  “Self”),  because 
liberation  is  promised  for  one  who  holds  on  to  That . 

The  insentient  Pradhana  cannot  be  implied  by  the  word 
“Self”;  for  the  super-sensuous  Existence,  forming  the  topic 
under  discussion,  is  referred  to  in  the  text,  “That  is  the  Self 
(Ch.  VI.  vii.  8),  and  then  by  saying,  “That  thou  art”  (ibid.), 
the  need  of  devotedness  to  It98  is  advised  for  a  sentient  being 
who  has  to  be  liberated.  Still  later,  liberation  itself  is  taught  in 


“Thinking  of  Existence-Brahman  as  identified  with  oneself. 


I.i. 7]  BRAHMA- SUTRA -BHA§YA  55 

the  words,  “One  who  has  a  teacher  knows.  For  him  there  is 
but  that  much  delay  as  is  needed  for  freedom  (from  the  present 
body);  then  He  becomes  identified  with  Reality”  (Ch.  VI. 
xiv.  2).  If  by  saying  “That  thou  art”,  the  scripture  should  make 
one  understand  the  insentient  Pradhana  to  be  the  meaning  of 
the  word  Reality,  that  is  to  say,  impart  the  instruction,  “Thou 
art  insentient”,  to  a  sentient  being  desirous  of  liberation,  then 
the  scripture,  speaking  contrariwise,  will  bring  evil  for  a  man 
and  lose  its  validity.  But  the  scripture  being  free  from  defects, 
should  not  be  fancied  to  be  invalid.  If,  however  the  scripture, 
authoritative  as  it  is,  should  tell  an  ignorant  man,  aspiring  for 
liberation,  that  the  insentient  non-Self  is  his  Self,  he  will  not 
give  up  that  outlook  about  the  Self,  owing  to  his  faith  (in  the 
scripture)  like  the  blind  man  holding  on  to  the  tail  of  an  ox." 
As  a  result,  he  will  not  know  the  Self  that  is  different  from  that 
non-Self.  And  in  that  case  he  will  be  deflected  from  liberation 
and  get  into  trouble.  Hence  it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that,  even 
as  the  scriptures  advise  about  such  true  means  as  the  Agnihotra 
sacrifice  for  one  desirous  of  heaven  etc.,  so  also  they  teach  the 
aspirant  for  liberation  about  the  real  Self  in  such  texts  as,  “That 
is  the  Self”  (Ch.  VI.  vii.  8),  “That  thou  art,  O  Svetaketu” ' 
(ibid.).  On  this  view  the  instruction  about  liberation  to  one 
sticking  on  to  truth  becomes  justifiable  on  the  analogy  of  one 
getting  freed  by  taking  hold  of  a  heated  axe.100  On  the  con¬ 
trary,  if  instruction  is  imparted  about  something  as  the  real 
Self  that  is  but  indirectly  so,  this  will  only  amount  to  a  form 

"A  blind  man  lost  his  way  in  a  forest.  A  wicked  man  accosted  him 
courteously  and,  thus  gaining  confidence,  brought  a  heifer  and  asked  the 
blind  man  to  take  hold  of  its  tail,  assuring  him  that  it  would  lead  him 
out  of  the  forest.  In  good  faith  the  blind  man  followed  the  advice,  holding 
on  to  the  tail  tenaciously.  As  a  result  he  was  dragged  over  rough  ground 
and  brambles,  getting  cuts  all  the  time. 

100 The  Chandogya  Upanisad  cites  this  example  (VI.  xiv).  When 
somebody,  accused  of  theft,  denied  the  charge,  a  red-hot  axe  was 
brought  for  testing  him.  If  he  was  truthful,  the  truth  protected  him,  and 
he  was  not  harmed  by  taking  hold  of  it.  So  he  was  released.  But  if  he 
lied,  the  lie  did  not  protect  him;  the  axe  burnt  him,  and  he  was  punished. 
The  point  is  that  truth  saves  a  man.  So  also  one  holding  on  to  Brahman, 
that  is  Truth,  becomes  liberated. 


56  BRAHMA- SUTRA -BHASYA  [I.i. 7 

of  meditation  called  Sampad ,101  as  contained  in  the  instruction, 
“One  should  meditate  thus,  T  am  the  vital  force’  ”  (Ai.  A.  II. 
i.  2.6),  and  its  result  will  be  impermanent.  But  to  speak  of  it 
in  that  sense  as  an  instruction  about  liberation  becomes  incon¬ 
sistent.  Accordingly,  the  word  “Self”  is  not  used  in  a  secondary 
sense  with  regard  to  the  inscrutable  Reality.  The  use  of  the 
word  “Self”  in  a  secondary  sense,  in  the  case  of  a  servant,  in 
the  sentence,  “Bhadrasena  is  my  Self”,  is  justifiable  since  the 
difference  between  the  master  and  the  servant  is  obvious. 
Moreover,  from  the  fact  that  something  is  referred  to  in  a 
figurative  sense  somewhere,  it  is  illogical  to  give  a  figurative 
meaning  to  something  else  when  the  only  source  of  getting 
knowledge  about  it  is  verbal  communication;  for  that  will  result 
in  losing  faith  everywhere.  And  the  statement  is  false  that,  on 
the  analogy  of  the  use  of  the  same  word  “ jyotis ”  (fire)  for 
both  sacrifice  and  fire,  the  word  “Self”  can  be  used  for  both 
sentient  and  insentient  things;  for  it  is  wrong  to  assume  different 
meanings  for  the  same  word  (in  the  same  context).  Therefore 
(the  real  position  is  that)  the  word  “Self”,  implying  a  conscious 
entity  in  its  primary  sense,  is  used  in  a  figurative  sense  in  such 
sentences  as,  “The  elements  themselves”,  “The  organs  them¬ 
selves”,  by  ascribing  sentience  to  these.  Even  if  the  word  “Self’ 
be  common  to  different  things,  it  cannot  be  pronounced  to 
imply  either  of  the  two  (sentience  or  insentience)  unless  there 
be  some  determining  factor  like  the  context  or  a  word  prefixed. 
Not  that  any  such  factor  can  definitely  decide  here  in  favour 
of  the  insentient  (Pradhana).  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  subject 
under  consideration  is  Existence  that  visualizes.  Besides,  Svcta- 
ketu,  a  conscious  being,  is  near  at  hand.  And  we  said  that  it  is 
not  possible  that  the  insentient  should  be  the  Self  of  the  sentient 
Svetaketu.  Hence  the  conclusion  arrived  at  is  that  the  word 
“Self’  here  refers  to  the  sentient.  Even  the  word  “ jyotis ” 
implies  by  common  usage  that  (fire)  which  illumines;  but  from 
the  similarity  of  illuminating,  arrived  at  by  some  eulogistic 
fancy  ( Arthavada ),  it  is  applied  to  a  sacrifice:  thus  the  illustra¬ 
tion  has  no  cogency. 

101  Where  something  inferior  is  thought  of  as  some  other  superior  thing 
owing  to  some  similarity  and  not  identity  (see  f.n.  65). 


I.  i.  8] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


57 


Or  the  aphorism  can  be  interpreted  differently.  The  explana¬ 
tion  will  be  that,  in  the  previous  aphorism  itself,  the  un-Vedic 
Pradhana  was  explained  away  as  beyond  the  possibility  of  being 
meant  by  the  word  “Self”  in  any  secondary  or  generic  sense. 
And  so  in  the  present  aphorism,  “ . . .  because  liberation  is 
promised  for  one  who  holds  on  to  That”,  an  independent 
reason  is  offered  for  refuting  Pradhana  as  the  cause  of  the 
universe.  Thus  the  insentient  Pradhana  is  not  the  meaning  of 
the  word  “Existence”  (Sat). 

For  what  additional  reason  is  Pradhana  not  meant  by 
“Existence”? 


II  s  II 

Because  of  the  absence  of  any  mention  of 
rejection,  ^  as  also  (another  reason). 

8 .  (Fradhana  has  not  been  spoken  of  even  indirectly ),  because 
there  is  no  subsequent  mention  of  its  rejection ,  and  ( because 
that  militates  against  the  assertion  at  the  beginning ). 

Supposing  that  Pradhana,  though  it  is  not  the  Self,  is  meant 
here  by  the  word  “Existence”  and  is  taught  in  the  texts,  “That 
is  the  Self”  (Ch.  VI.  vii.  8)  and  “That  thou  art”  (ibid.),  the 
Upani$ad  (or  teacher),  seeking  to  teach  the  primary  Self,  should 
have  spoken  later  on  that  Pradhana  is  to  be  rejected,  so 
that  after  hearing  that  (earlier)  instruction  the  aspirant  may 
not  cling  on  to  that  Pradhana  as  the  Self,  owing  to  his  not 
having  been  enlightened  about  the  (true)  Self.  This  can  be 
illustrated  thus:  A  man  desirous  of  pointing  out  the  (tiny  star) 
Arundhatl,  first  shows  a  nearby  big  star  indirectly  as  the 
Arundhatl  itself.  And  then  he  discards  it  and  shows  subsequently 
the  Arundhatl  itself.  Similarly  (here  also)  the  text  should  have 
said,  “This  is  not  the  Self.”  But  it  has  not  been  done  so.  Rather  it 
is  seen  that  the  Sixth  Chapter  (of  the  Chandogya  Upanisad) 
terminates  by  clinging  on  to  the  knowledge  of  Existence. 

The  word  “and”  (in  the  aphorism)  is  used  to  point  to  an 
additional  reason,  viz  that  the  assumption  of  Pradhana  runs 
counter  to  the  assertion  started  with.  Granted  even  that  there 


58  BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  i.  8 

is  a  subsequent  denial,  there  arises  thereby  the  contingency  of 
contradicting  the  initial  premise.  The  premise  started  with  is 
that  everything  becomes  known  on  knowing  the  cause;  for  at 
the  start  of  the  conversation  we  hear:  “(Gautama  says),  ‘Did 
you,  O  Svetaketu,  ask  about  that  (entity  which  is  known  from) 
instruction  (alone,  and)  through  which  the  unheard  becomes 
heard,  the  unthought  becomes  thought  ( mamma ),  and  the 
unmeditated  becomes  meditated  ( nididhyasana)V  (Svetaketu): 
‘How  can  that  entity  be  possibly  known  from  instruction 
alone?’  ‘As  after  knowing  a  lump  of  clay,  O  amiable  one, 
everything  made  of  clay  is  known,  since  all  modifications  have 
speech  as  their  origin  and  exist  in  name  only,  clay  alone  being 
the  reality  (Ch.  VI.  i.  3),  ...thus,  O  amiable  one,  is  this 
Reality  known  from  instruction’  ”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  2-6).  Besides, 
even  if  Pradhana,  the  so-called  Existence  which  is  the  cause  of 
all  objects  of  experience  (i.e.  enjoyment  and  suffering),  be 
known  either  as  an  acceptable  or  rejectable  thing,  those  entities 
coming  under  the  category  of  experiencers  (i.e.  subjects)  will 
still  remain  unknown,102  for  the  experiencing  subjects  as  a 
class  are  not  modifications  of  Pradhana.  Therefore  Pradhana  is 
not  referred  to  by  the  word  “Existence”. 

What  further  reason  is  there  to  show  that  Pradhana  is  not 
referred  to  by  the  word  “Existence”? 

|1  || 

Because  of  the  merger  into  one’s  Self. 

9.  Because  of  the  merger  of  the  individual  into  his  ovm  Self . 

With  regard  to  the  very  cause,  called  “Existence”,  it  is  heard 
from  the  Vedic  text:  “O  amiable  one,  when  in  the  state  of 
sleeping  thus,  the  individual  gets  the  epithet  of  svapiti  (he 
sleeps),  then  he  becomes  unified  with  Existence,  he  becomes 
apita  (merged)  svam  (into  his  own  Self).  Therefore  they  call 
him  svapiti  (he  sleeps),  for  he  becomes  unified  in  his  own  Self” 

103  So  that  the  premise,  “All  is  known  by  knowing  one”,  will  be 
falsified. 


I.i.9] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


59 


(Ch.  VI.  viii.  1).  This  text  gives  the  derivative  meaning  of  the 
name  svapiti  of  the  individual,  as  it  is  well  known  in  the  world. 
The  Self  is  meant  here  by  the  word  sva.  The  meaning  is  that 
he  finds  himself  arrived  at,  that  is  to  say,  he  becomes  absorbed 
into  that  which  is  being  considered  here  under  the  name 
“Existence”.  The  root  i  (meaning  “to  go”),  when  preceded  by 
the  prefix  api>  is  familiarly  known  to  mean  merger,  for  it  is 
seen  that  origin  and  dissolution  are  referred  to  by  the  phrase 
prabhava-apyayau .  The  individual  soul  keeps  awake  so  long  as 
it  is  under  the  influence  of  the  characteristics  of  those  objects 
of  sense-perception  which  it  apprehends  as  a  result  of  its 
contact  with  the  conditioning  factors  constituted  by  the  diverse 
manifestations  of  the  mind.103  It  assumes  the  name  of  mind 
while  seeing  dreams  under  the  influence  of  the  impressions  of 
the  experiences  of  the  waking  state.  And  when  these  two 
conditioning  factors  become  inactive  in  the  state  of  sleep,  it 
appears  to  be  merged,  as  it  were,  in  the  Self,  owing  to  the 
absence  of  particularization  created  by  limiting  adjuncts;  and 
hence  it  is  said  to  have  become  merged  in  its  own  Self.104 
This  is  like  the  Upanisadic  derivation  of  the  word  hrdaya  (lit. 
heart)  shown  in,  “That  Self  exists  verily  ‘in  the  heart’  ( hrdi ). 
This  indeed  is  its  etymological  meaning,  ‘ Hrdi  ayam  (in  the 
heart  it  is)’.  Therefore  it  is  called  hrdayam”  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  3). 
Or  this  is  like  the  showing  of  the  root  meaning  underlying  the 
use  of  the  words  asemaya  and  udanya  in,  “It  is  apah  (waters) 
indeed  that  nay  ante  (digest)  the  asita  (eaten  food)”,  (and 
hence  water  is  called  asemaya  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  3),  “It  is  fire  indeed 
that  nay  ate  (dries  up)  what  is  drunk  (i.e.  udaka)J\  (therefore 
fire  is  called  udanya)  (ibid.).  Similarly  with  the  help  of 
derivation,  the  text  shows  the  meaning  of  the  term  svapiti ,  viz 
that  the  individual  gets  merged  in  his  own  Self  called  Exist- 

103  The  changes  occurring  in  the  mind  in  relation  to  sense-objects  are 
the  limiting  adjuncts  of  the  Self.  Through  them  It  comes  into  contact 
with  gross  objects  like  pot  etc.  Through  that  relationship  It  perceives 
those  objects,  including  the  body,  and  mistakes  the  body  as  Itself.  This  is 
Its  waking  state. 

104  Thus  merger  really  means  freedom  from  limiting  adjuncts  and  not 
becoming  something  else. 


60  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  i.  9 

ence.105  Furthermore,  the  sentient  soul  cannot  attain  the  insenti¬ 
ent  Pradhana  as  its  very  reality.  Even  if  it  be  argued  that 
Pradhana  itself  is  referred  to  by  the  word  sva  (its  own  Self), 
because  it  belongs  to  the  soul,  still  it  will  amount  to  a  contra¬ 
diction  to  say  that  the  sentient  merges  in  the  insentient.  And 
there  is  this  other  Upanisadic  text  which  reveals  the  merger  of 
the  individual  into  a  conscious  entity  in  the  state  of  sleep: 
“Being  completely  embraced  by  the  conscious  Self,  it  does  not 
know  anything  external  or  anything  internal”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  21). 
Accordingly,  that  in  which  all  sentient  creatures  merge  is  a 
conscious  entity  called  “Existence”,  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe.  But  Pradhana  is  not  so. 

How,  again  is  Pradhana  not  the  cause  of  the  universe? 

II  II 

Because  the  knowledge  is  the  same. 

10.  Because  the  knowledge  (gathered  from  the  various  Upa - 
nisads)  is  the  same  (as  regards  Consciousness  being  the  cause). 

If  the  cause  were  diversely  apprehended  even  in  the 
Upanisads,  just  as  it  is  in  the  schools  of  the  logicians — if 
Brahman  were  the  cause  somewhere,  while  somewhere  else  it 
were  the  insentient  Pradhana,  and  still  at  other  places  something 
else — then  the  Vedic  mention  of  “hearing”  etc.  could  have 
been  interpreted  at  times  in  a  way  to  conform  to  the  theory 
of  Pradhana  as  the  cause.  But  no  such  difference  of  apprehen¬ 
sion  occurs.  In  all  the  Upanisads,  Consciousness  is  apprehended 
uniformly  as  the  cause,  as  for  instance  in  the  texts:  “As  from  a 
burning  fire,  the  sparks  fly  diversely  in  different  directions, 
similarly  from  this  Self  all  the  senses  and  organs  originate  in 
their  respective  loci.  After  the  senses  originate  their  presiding 
deities,  and  after  the  deities  emerge  the  sense-objects”  (Kau. 
III.  8),  “From  that  very  Self,  that  is  such,  originated  space” 
(Tai.  II.  i),  “From  the  Self  indeed  came  all  this”  (Ch.  VII. 

105  The  derivation  here  is  not  a  mere  figure  of  speech,  but  it  points  to 
a  fact,  even  as  the  Upanisadic  derivations  do  in  other  places. 


I.  i.  12] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


61 


xxvi.  1),  “From  the  Self  emerges  this  vital  force’*  (Pr.  III.  3), 
etc.,  where  all  the  Upani$ads  reveal  the  Self  as  the  cause.  And 
we  said  that  the  word  “Self”  implies  a  conscious  entity.  This 
also  is  a  great  proof  of  the  validity  of  the  Upani$ads,  that  just 
like  the  eyes  etc.,  imparting  the  same  kind  of  knowledge  about 
colour  etc.,  the  Upani$ads  also  impart  the  same  kind  of 
knowledge  about  the  Self’s  being  the  cause  of  the  universe. 
Hence  it  follows  from  the  uniformity  in  the  trend  (of  the 
meaning  imparted)  that  omniscient  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the 
universe. 

What  more  reason  is  there  to  prove  that  Brahman  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe? 


n  u  » 

^  And  because  revealed  in  the  Upani$ads. 

11.  And  because  (Brahman  is)  revealed  (as  such)  in  the 
Upanifads. 

In  the  very  words  of  the  Svetasvatara  Upani$ad,  Brahman  is 
presented  as  the  cause  of  the  universe.  Having  introduced  the 
all-knowing  God,  the  Svetasvatara  Upani§ad  says,  “In  this 
universe  He  has  no  master,  no  ruler;  nor  has  He  any  distin¬ 
guishing  sign.  He  is  the  cause  and  the  ordainer  of  the  masters 
of  the  organs.  He  has  no  originator  and  no  ordainer”  (Sv. 
VI.  9).  Therefore  it  is  proved  that  omniscient  God  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe,  and  not  Pradhana  or  anything  else. 

Topic  6:  The  Blissful  One 

Opponent :  It  has  been  established  with  the  help  of  logic 
that  the  Upani$adic  texts,  referred  to  by  the  aphorisms  starting 
with,  “That  from  which  the  birth  etc.  of  this  are  derived” 
(I.  i.  2)  and  ending  with,  “Because  revealed  in  the  Upani$ads” 
(I.  i.  11),  aim  at  proving  that  omniscient  and  omnipotent  God 
is  the  cause  of  the  origin,  continuance,  and  dissolution  of  the 
universe.  And  by  asserting  that  the  same  kind  of  knowledge  is 
gathered  from  all  the  Upani$ads,  it  has  been  explained  that  all 


62 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[Li.  12 


the  Upanisads  speak  of  a  conscious  entity  as  the  cause.  What 
then  is  the  idea  of  proceeding  with  the  remaining  portion  of 
the  book? 

The  answer  (of  the  V e darnin')  is:  Brahman  is  known  in  two 
aspects — one  as  possessed  of  the  limiting  adjunct  constituted 
by  the  diversities  of  the  universe  which  is  a  modification  of 
name  and  form,  and  the  other  devoid  of  all  conditioning 
factors  and  opposed  to  the  earlier.  There  are  many  texts  like 
the  following  which,  by  making  a  division  between  the  subject- 
matters  of  knowledge  and  ignorance,  show  in  a  thousand  ways 
these  two  aspects  of  Brahman:  “Because  when  there  is  duality, 
as  it  were,  then  one  sees  something. . . .  But  when  to  the  knower 
of  Brahman  everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what  should 
one  see  and  through  what?”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  15),  “That  is  the 
infinite  (absolute  Brahman)  where  (the  illumined)  one  does  not 
see  anything  else,  does  not  hear  anything  else,  does  not  know 
anything  else;  while  that  is  the  finite  (qualified  Brahman)  where 
one  sees  something  else,  hears  something  else,  knows  something 
else.  That  which  is  infinite  is  verily  immortal,  while  that  which 
is  finite  is  mortal”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1),  “The  supreme  Self, 
which  after  creating  all  forms  and  then  giving  them  names, 
(enters  into  them  as  individual  souls  and)  continues  to  utter 
those  names”  (Tai.  A.  III.  xii.  7),  “It  is  without  parts,  action, 
change,  defect,  and  virtue  and  vice;  It  is  the  supreme  bridge 
leading  to  immortality,  and  It  is  like  fire  that  has  burnt  out  its 
fuel”  (Sv.  VI.  19),  “Not  this,  not  this”  (Bjr.  II.  iii.  6),  “It  is 
neither  gross  nor  minute,  neither  short  nor  long”  (Bjr.  III.  viii. 
8),  “That  which  is  different  from  the  Absolute  is  finite;  that 
which  is  different  from  the  Qualified  is  the  Absolute”.  That 
being  the  case,  it  is  in  the  state  of  ignorance  that  Brahman  can 
come  within  the  range  of  empirical  dealings,  comprising  the 
object  of  (worshipful  or  notional)  meditation,  the  meditator, 
and  so  on.  Of  such  meditations,  some  are  conducive  to  the 
attainment  of  higher  states  and  some  to  liberation  by  stages,  and 
some  to  the  greater  efficacy  of  actions.106  These  differ  in 


100  For  instance,  worship  of  symbols,  meditation  on  Brahman  as  confined 
in  the  heart,  meditation  on  Udgitba  respectively. 


I.i.  12] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


63 


accordance  with  the  qualities  or  conditioning  factors  involved.107 
Although  the  one  God,  the  supreme  Self,  is  to  be  meditated  on 
as  possessed  of  those  qualities,  still  the  results  differ  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  quality  meditated  on,  as  is  stated  in  the  Vedic 
texts:  “One  becomes  just  what  one  meditates  Him  to  be”, 
“After  departure  from  this  world,  a  man  becomes  what  he  had 
willed  to  be  (i.e.  meditated  on)”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1).  This  is  also 
borne  out  by  the  Smyti,  “Remembering  whatever  object,  at  the 
end,  he  leaves  the  body,  that  alone  is  reached  by  him,  O  son 
of  Kuntl”  (Gita,  VIII.  6).  Although  it  is  the  same  Self  that 
remains  hidden  in  all  beings — moving  or  stationary — still  in  the 
text,  “He  who  meditates  on  the  Self,  manifested  in  a  more 
pronounced  way,  attains  It”  (Ai.  A.  II.  iii.  2.1),  one  hears 
about  the  Self — unchanging  and  ever  homogeneous  though  It  is 
— tfhat  there  is  a  difference  in  the  degrees  of  Its  manifestation 
of  glory  and  power,  that  being  caused  by  the  gradation  of  the 
minds  by  which  It  becomes  conditioned.  In  the  Smrti  also 
there  is  the  text:  “Whatever  being  there  is  great,  prosperous, 
or  powerful,  that  know  thou  to  be  a  product  of  a  part  of  my 
splendour”  (Gita,  X.  41),  where  it  is  enjoined  that  wherever 
there  is  an  excess  of  greatness  etc.  it  is  to  be  worshipped  as 
God.  Similarly  here  also  it  will  be  stated  that  the  effulgent 
all-pervasive  entity,  residing  in  the  solar  orb,  must  be  the 
supreme  Self,  for  (the  mention  of)  the  transcendence  by  Him 
of  all  sins  is  an  indication  to  that  effect  (B.  S.  I.  i.  20).  This 
also  is  the  line  of  interpretation  that  is  noticeable  in  the  aphorism, 
“The  word  dkdsa  (lit.  space)  is  used  in  the  sense  of  Brahman, 
for  Brahman’s  indicatory  mark  is  in  evidence”  (I.  i.  22),  etc. 
Thus  also  it  is  a  fact  that,  although  the  knowledge  of  the  Self 
results  in  instantaneous  liberation,  yet  its  instruction  is  imparted 
with  the  help  of  some  relationship  with  some  conditioning 
factor.  Accordingly,  although  the  relationship  with  the  condi¬ 
tioning  factor  is  not  the  idea  sought  to  be  imparted,  still  from 
the  reference  to  the  superior  and  inferior  Brahman  the  doubt 
may  arise  that  the  knowledge  refers  to  either  of  the  two;  and 


107  Quality — e.g.  Brahman  as  possessed  of  true  resolve,  etc.  Conditioning 
factors — e.g.  Brahman  as  existing  in  the  heart. 


64 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.i.  12 


this  has  to  be  decided  upon  by  taking  into  consideration  the 
trend  of  the  sentences.  The  present  aphorism  itself,  “He  who 
is  full  of  Bliss  (i.e.  the  Blissful  One)  is  Brahman,  because  there 
is  a  repetition  (of  Bliss)”  may  be  quoted  as  an  illustration.  The 
remaining  portion  of  the  book  is  proceeded  with  in  order  to 
show  that  although  Brahman  is  one,  It  is  spoken  of  in  the 
Upanisad  as  either  to  be  meditated  on  or  known  (respectively) 
with  or  without  the  help  of  Its  relation  with  the  limiting 
adjuncts.  Moreover,  the  refutation  of  any  other  insentient 
thing  as  the  cause  (of  the  universe)  that  was  made  by  the 
aphorism,  “Because  the  knowledge  (gathered  from  the  various 
Upanisads)  is  the  same”  (I.  i.  10),  is  being  elaborated  in  the 
remaining  text,  which,  while  explaining  other  sentences  as 
speaking  of  Brahman,  refutes  any  other  cause  opposed  to 
Brahman. 

Doubt :  After  presenting  successively  the  selves  made  of 
food  (Tai.  II.  i.  2),  vital  force  (Tai.  II.  ii.  2),  mind  (Tai.  II. 
iii.  2),  intelligence  (Tai.  II.  iv.  1),  it  is  stated,  “As  compared 
with  this  self  made  of  intelligence,  there  is  another  inner  self 
full  of  Bliss”  (Tai  II.  v.  2).  Here  the  doubt  arises:  Is  the 
supreme  Brahman,  presented  in  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge, 
Infinite”  (Tai.  II.  i),  spoken  of  here  by  the  word  “Blissful  One” 
( Anandamaya ),  or  is  it  some  entity  like  the  seifs  constituted 
by  food  etc.,  which  is  other  than  Brahman?  What  should  be 
the  conclusion  here? 

Opponent  (i.e.  Vrttikdra ):  The  Blissful  One  must  be  a 
secondarv  self  other  than  Brahman. 

Why? 

Because  He  is  included  in  the  series  of  the  secondary  seifs 
constituted  by  food  etc. 

Objection  :  Even  so,  the  Blissful  One  must  be  the  primary 
Self,  He  being  the  inmost  of  all. 

Opponent :  It  cannot  be  so,  for  He  possesses  such  limbs  as 
joy  etc.  and  because  the  Upanisad  refers  to  His  embodiedness. 
If  the  Blissful  Self  were  the  primary  Self,  It  could  not  have 
possessed  (the  limbs)  happiness  etc.  But  in  this  context  the 
Upanisad  says,  “Of  Him,  joy  is  verily  the  head”  (Tai.  II.  v), 
and  so  on.  Embodiedness  is  also  mentioned  in,  “Of  that  preced- 


I.  i.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  65 

in g  (intelligent)  Self,  this  One  (i.e.  the  Blissful  One)  is  the 
embodied  self”  (Tai.  II.  iii).  The  meaning  of  this  is:  “Of  the 
preceding  one”,  i.e.  of  the  intelligent  self,  “this  One  is  the 
embodied  Self”,  “which”  is  this  One  full  of  Bliss.  And  it  is 
not  possible  to  deny  the  touch  of  joy  and  sorrow  so  long  as 
one  has  a  body.  Therefore  by  the  term  “full  of  Bliss  (or 
Blissful)”  is  meant  the  transmigrating  soul. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  said: 

3Tw^Rtswrrara;ii  \\  11 

The  Blissful  One  on  account  of  repetition. 

12.  The  Blissful  One  is  the  supreme  Self  on  account  of 
repetition. 

The  supreme  Self  alone  can  be  the  “One  full  of  Bliss”  (Bliss¬ 
ful  One). 

Why? 

Because  of  repetition;  for  it  is  in  reference  to  the  supreme 
Self  alone  that  the  word  “Bliss”  is  repeated  many  times.  After 
introducing  the  Blissful  One,  and  speaking  of  Him  as  Bliss  in  the 
text,  “He  is  Bliss  to  be  sure”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1),  it  is  stated,  “For  one 
(i.e.  the  individual)  becomes  happy  by  coming  in  contact 
with  Bliss.  Who  indeed  would  inhale  or  exhale  if  this  Bliss 
were  not  there  in  the  supreme  space  (within  the  heart)?  For 
this  One  indeed  delights  people”  (Tai.  II.  vii),  “This  is  an 
evaluation  of  Bliss”  (Tai.  II.  viii.  1),  “He  attains  this  self  full 
of  Bliss”  (Tai.  II.  viii.  5),  “The  enlightened  man  is  not  afraid 
of  anything  after  realizing  the  Bliss  of  Brahman”  (Tai.  II.  ix.  1), 
and  “He  knew  Bliss  as  Brahman”  (Tai.  III.  vi).  In  another 
Upani$ad  also  the  word  Bliss  is  seen  to  be  used  for  Brahman 
Itself  in  the  sentence,  “Knowledge,  Bliss,  Brahman”  (Bf.  III.  ix. 
28.7).  Thus  from  the  repeated  use  of  the  word  Bliss  for 
Brahman,  it  is  understood  that  the  Blissful  (Anandamaya)  Self 
is  Brahman. 

As  for  the  criticism  that  the  Blissful  One  is  also  a  secondary 
self  because  of  His  occurrence  in  the  chain  of  secondary  seifs, 
counting  from  the  one  constituted  by  food,  that  creates  no 
5 


66  BRAHMA -SOTR A -BHA§YA  [Li.  12 

difficulty,  the  Blissful  One  being  the  innermost  of  all.  Being 
desirous  of  instructing  about  the  primary  Self,  the  scripture 
follows  the  line  of  understanding  of  common  people.  Thus  it 
(first)  adopts  as  the  Self  the  body  constituted  by  food  and 
known  as  the  Self  to  the  extremely  dull  people.  And  then  the 
scripture  lets  the  successive  ones,  which  are  really  non-Selves,  to 
be  grasped  as  the  seifs  of  the  earlier  ones,  being  successively 
inner  than  and  similar  to  the  earlier  ones,  like  the  images  formed 
by  pouring  molten  copper  etc.  into  moulds.  By  following  such 
a  process  for  easy  comprehension,  the  scripture  teaches  about 
the  Blissful  One,  who  is  the  Self  in  the  real  sense.  This  is  the 
more  logical  interpretation.  As  in  the  case  of  showing  the  star 
called  Arundhat!  (B.  S.  I.  i.  8),  the  real  Arundhatl  happens  to  be 
the  one  mentioned  last  after  the  indication  of  many  stars  which 
are  assumed  to  be  Arundhatl,  similarly  here  also  the  Blissful 
One  must  be  the  primary  Self,  He  being  the  inmost  of  all. 

And  the  objection  was  raised  that  for  the  primary  Self  it  is 
illogical  to  fancy  joy  etc.  as  Its  head  etc.  But  that  fanciful 
ascription  of  limbs  occurs  not  because  of  the  nature  of  the 
Blissful  Self,  but  because  of  the  presence  of  the  penultimate 
limiting  adjunct  (intellect)  immediately  before.  Therefore  the 
objection  is  groundless.  The  embodiedness  of  the  Blissful  One 
too  is  spoken  of  in  a  context  of  the  successive  embodiedness  of 
thfc  food-self  and  the  rest;  and  hence,  unlike  the  individual  soul, 
the  Blissful  Self  has  no  real  embodiedness.  Accordingly,  the 
Blissful  One  is  the  supreme  Self. 

Owing  to  the  use  of  a  word  denoting  modification 
*T  not  so,  5%  if  it  be  argued  thus,  (then)  *T  not  (so); 
because  of  abundance. 

13.  If  it  be  argued  that  (the  Blissful  One)  is  not  Brahman, 
owing  to  the  use  of  a  word  (suffix)  denoting  modification,  we 
say  no,  for  the  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  abundance. 

Here  the  opponent  says:  The  Blissful  One  cannot  be  the 
supreme  Self. 


I.i.  14] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


67 


Why? 

Because  of  the  use  of  the  word  mayaf  (as  a  suffix)  denoting 
modification.  The  phrase  “Blissful  One”  ( Anandamaya ,  formed 
from  a  combination  of  ananda,  Bliss,  and  may  at,  made  of)  is  to 
be  understood  as  denoting  a  modification,  as  distinguished  from 
the  original  word  (Bliss)  itself;108  for  mayat  conveys  the  idea 
of  modification  here.  Therefore  the  word  Anandamaya  (made 
of  Bliss),  like  the  words  annamaya  (made  of  food)  etc.,  conveys 
the  sense  of  modification. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  in  the  Smjti  (i.e.  Paijini’s  grammar  V.  iv. 
21)  it  is  mentioned  that  (the  suffix)  mayat  has  also  the  sense  of 
abundance.  Thus  in  the  aphorism,  “Hence  mayat  is  used  when 
the  intention  is  to  convey  an  abundance  of  the  basic  idea 
(contained  in  the  word  prefixed)”,  it  is  shown  that  mayaf  is 
used  to  indicate  abundance.  As  in  the  illustration,  “ Annamayo 
yajno  bhavati — The  sacrifice  must  have  an  abundance  of  food”, 
annamaya  means  an  abundance  of  food,  so  also  Brahman, 
having  an  abundance  of  Bliss,  is  called  anandamaya  (full  of 
Bliss).  And  the  plenitude  of  the  Bliss  of  Brahman  follows  from 
the  fact  that  (in  the  course  of  a  graded  evaluation  of  Bliss  in 
the  Taittirlya  Upani$ad),  the  start  is  made  from  the  human 
plane,  and  then  it  is  shown  that  the  Bliss  in  each  subsequent 
plane  is  a  hundredfold  of  the  preceding  one,  the  Bliss  of 
Brahman  being  unsurpassable  (II.  viii).  Hence  mayaf  has  the 
sense  of  abundance. 


II  II 

^  And  Owing  to  the  indication  as  the  source  of 

that. 

14.  For  the  further  reason  that  Brahman  is  indicated  as  the 
source  of  Bliss. 

The  suffix  mayaf  is  used  in  the  sense  of  abundance  for  the 

108  In  “He  eats  wheat  with  vegetables”  what  is  meant  is  that  the  modifica¬ 
tion  of  wheat  (e.g.  bread)  is  being  eaten  with  curries.  Thus  the  original 
words  may  denote  their  modifications.  So  by  a  reverse  process  Ananda - 
maya  denotes  ananda  itself.  The  opponent  denies  this  position. 


68  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  i.  14 

further  reason  that  the  Upani$adic  text,  “For  this  One  indeed 
enlivens  people”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1),  declares  Brahman  as  the  source 
of  Bliss.  The  word  arumdayati  (in  this  text)  means  the  same  as 
anandayati.  One  who  delights  others  is  known  to  be  possessed  of 
an  abundance  of  Bliss,  just  as  in  the  world  a  man  who  makes 
others  rich  is  known  to  be  abundantly  rich.  Thus  since  may  at 
can  be  used  in  the  sense  of  plenitude  as  well,  the  Blissful  One 
must  be  the  supreme  Self. 

^  II  II 

?  And  ^  the  very  one  spoken  of  in  the  mantra 

is  declared. 

IS.  And  the  very  Brahman  spoken  of  in  the  mantra  is 
declared  in  the  brahmana  (portion  explaining  the  mantra ). 

The  Blissful  One  must  be  the  supreme  Self  for  this  additional 
reason:  After  commencing  with  the  sentence,  “A  knower  of 
Brahman  attains  the  Highest”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  the  very  Brahman 
that  was  introduced  in  the  mantra  text,  “Brahman  is  Truth, 
Knowledge,  Infinite”  (ibid.),  as  distinguished  by  such  character¬ 
istics  as  “truth,  knowledge,  infinity”,  is  spoken  of  in  the 
brahmana  portion.  That  very  Brahman  from  which  the  elements, 
counting  from  space,  emanate,  that  Brahman  which  creates  the 
beings  and  then  entering  into  them  dwells  in  their  hearts  as  the 
inmost  Self  of  all,  that  Brahman  for  the  sake  of  whose  know¬ 
ledge  a  topic  has  been  pursued  by  saying  “another  internal  self”, 
“another  internal  self”,  and  so  on  (Tai.  II.  ii-v) — that  very 
Brahman  is  declared  in  that  mantra  portion,  and  that  very 
Brahman  is  spoken  of  in  the  brahmana  portion  by  the  text, 
“There  is  another  self  called  the  Blissful  One  who  is  inside  this” 
(Tai.  II.  v.  2).  It  is  proper  that  the  mantra  and  brahmana  (por¬ 
tions)  should  bear  the  same  meaning,  for  they  are  never 
contradictory.  Otherwise  it  will  lead  to  the  fault  of  abandoning 
the  topic  under  discussion  and  starting  with  something  not 
under  consideration.  Not  that  any  self  is  mentioned  as  dwelling 
inside  the  Blissful  One  as  is  done  in  the  case  of  the  food-self 
etc.  And  “that  knowledge  gathered  by  Bhrgu  and  imparted  by 


I.i.17] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


69 


Varuna”  (Tai.  III.  vi)  relates  to  this  only.  Therefore  the 
Blissful  One  must  be  the  supreme  Self. 

II  II 

*T  Not  the  other  one  SFjTTxf:  because  of  illogicality. 

16.  The  other  is  not  the  supreme  Self ,  because  that  is  illogical. 

For  this  additional  reason,  the  Blissful  One,  and  not  the  other, 
must  be  the  supreme  Self.  “The  other”  is  the  transmigrating 
being  which  is  different  from  God,  that  is  to  say,  the  individual 
soul.  The  individual  soul  is  not  meant  by  the  term  Blissful  One. 

Why? 

Because  of  illogicality.  Relating  to  the  Blissful  One,  it  is 
stated  in  the  Upani$ad,  “He  wished,  ‘Let  me  become  many,  let 
me  be  born’.  He  undertook  a  deliberation.  Having  deliberated, 
He  created  all  this  that  exists”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1).  The  deliberation 
before  the  creation  of  body  etc.,  the  non-difference  of  the 
things  created  from  the  creator,  and  the  creation  of  all  the 
modifications  mentioned  in  that  text  cannot  be  justifiable  for 
any  one  other  than  the  supreme  Self. 

•fowntaw  n  w  ii 

^  And  because  of  the  assertion  of  difference. 

11.  And  because  of  the  assertion  of  the  difference  ( between 
the  individual  soul  and  the  supreme  Self). 

For  this  further  reason  the  Blissful  One  is  not  a  transmigrating 
soul.  In  the  context  dealing  with  the  Blissful  One,  the  individual 
soul  and  the  Blissful  One  are  mentioned  separately  in  the  text: 
“He  is  Bliss  (rasa)  indeed.  For  one  (i.e.  the  individual)  becomes 
happy  by  getting  that  Bliss”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1).  Not  that  the 
acquirer  can  be  the  thing  acquired. 

Opponent :  In  that  case  how  can  there  be  these  Vedic  and 
Smjti  texts,  “The  Self  is  to  be  sought  for”,  “There  is  nothing 
higher  than  the  attainment  of  the  Self”?  For  it  has  been  said 
that  there  can  be  no  attainer  (of  one’s  own  Self)  as  such. 


70  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  i.  17 

Veddntin :  Quite  so.  Still  in  the  case  of  ordinary  people,  it  is 
seen  that,  though  the  Self  ever  retains  Its  true  nature  of  being 
the  Self,  there  is  a  false  self-identification  with  the  body  etc. 
which  are  non-Self.  Accordingly,  for  the  Self  that  has  become 
the  body  etc.,  such  assertions  are  possible  as:  “The  Self  remains 
undiscovered  and  has  to  be  sought  for”;  “It  is  unattained  and 
has  to  be  attained”;  “It  is  unheard  of  and  has  to  be  heard  of”; 
“It  is  unthought  of  and  has  to  be  thought  of”;  “It  is  unknown 
and  has  to  be  known”;  and  so  on.  But  from  the  highest  point 
of  view,  any  witness  or  hearer  other  than  God  is  denied  in 
such  texts  as,  “There  is  no  other  witness  but  Him”  (Bj\  III. 
vii.  23).  God  is  different  to  be  sure  from  the  one  imagined 
through  ignorance  to  be  embodied,  the  agent,  the  experiencer, 
and  called  the  Self  conditioned  by  the  intellect,  the  difference 
being  made  in  the  same  sense  that  the  magician  standing  on 
the  ground  is  fancied  to  be  different  from  the  magician  holding 
sword  and  shield  in  hands  and  climbing  up  by  a  rope  to  the 
sky,  though  in  reality  the  first  is  the  very  essence  of  the  latter; 
or  it  is  so  in  the  sense  that  the  space,  unlimited  by  any  condi¬ 
tioning  factor,  is  different  from  the  space  delimited  by  such  con¬ 
ditioning  factors  as  a  pot  etc.  Taking  for  granted  such  a 
difference  between  the  supreme  Self  and  the  Self  identified 
with  the  intellect,  it  has  been  said,  “The  other  is  not  the 
supreme  Self,  because  that  is  illogical”,  and  “And  because  of 
the  assertion  of  difference”. 

Hl^wfltHT  II  ^  II 

^  And  owing  to  wish  *T  no  ^*JHM-3PteTr  reliance  on 

inference. 

18.  There  can  be  no  reliance  on  inference  (for  arriving  at 
Pradhana)  owing  to  (the  mention  of)  desire. 

Besides,  in  the  context  of  the  Blissful  One  there  is  a  mention 
of  wishfulness  in  the  text,  “He  wished,  ‘Let  me  become  many, 
let  me  be  born’”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1).  Therefore  the  insentient 
Pradhana,  fancied  by  the  Samkhyas  through  inference,  is  not  to 
be  relied  on  as  representing  either  the  Blissful  One  or  the  cause 


I.  i.  12-19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  71 

of  the  universe.  Although  Pradhana  was  refuted  under  the 
aphorism,  “Because  of  the  attribution  of  thinking,  the  one  not 
taught  in  the  Upani$ads  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe”  (I.  i.  5), 
still  with  a  view  to  elaborating  how  the  texts  concur  in  impart¬ 
ing  the  same  kind  of  knowledge,  it  is  being  refuted  over  again 
as  a  side  issue  in  connection  with  the  wishfulness  (Tai.  II.  vi.  3) 
mentioned  in  the  text  referred  to  by  an  earlier  aphorism  (I.  i. 
16). 


^  snfei  u  u  n 

And  Wlfer  the  scripture  teaches  the  absolute  identity 

of  this  one  with  this  One. 

19.  Moreover,  the  scripture  teaches  the  absolute  identity  of 
this  one  with  this  (One). 

The  phrase  Blissful  One  is  not  used  to  mean  either  Pradhana 
or  the  individual  being,  because  the  scripture  enjoins  the 
identity  of  this  one,  i.e.  the  enlightened  individual  being,  with 
this,  i.e.  the  Blissful  One,  the  Self  under  consideration.  Tadyoga 
means  union  in  absolute  identification,  becoming  one  with  that, 
that  is  to  say,  liberation.  That  union  is  taught  by  the  scripture 
in,  “Whenever  the  aspirant  gets  fearlessly  established  in  this 
unseen  (i.e.  changeless),  bodiless,  inexpressible,  and  unsupport¬ 
ing  One,  he  reaches  the  state  of  fearlessness.  Whenever  the 
aspirant  creates  the  slightest  difference  in  this  One,  he  is  smitten 
with  fear”  (Tai.  II.  vii).  The  idea  implied  is  this:  He  does  not 
become  free  from  the  fear  of  transmigration  so  long  as  he  sees 
in  this  (Blissful)  One  the  slightest  difference  consisting  in  non¬ 
identity  (with  the  Self).  But  he  becomes  freed  from  the  fear 
of  transmigration  as  soon  as  he  gets  established  in  absolute 
identity  with  this  Blissful  One.  This  is  possible  if  the  supreme 
Self  be  the  same  as  the  Blissful  One,  but  not  so  if  either  the 
individual  being  or  Pradhana  be  meant.  Therefore  it  is  proved 
that  the  Blissful  One  is  the  supreme  Self. 

Samkara's  Correction :  But  we  have  to  say  this  in  this  con¬ 
nection.  There  is  a  series  of  uses  of  the  suffix  may  at  in  the  sense 
of  modification  in  the  following  passages:  “That  man,  such 


72 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.i.  12-19 


as  he  is,  is  a  product  of  the  essence  of  food”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1); 
“As  compared  with  this  self,  made  of  the  essence  of  food 
( annamaya ),  there  is  another  inner  self  which  is  made  of 
air  ( pranamaya — made  of  vital  force)”  (Tai.  II.  ii);  “As 
compared  with  this  self,  there  is  another  internal  self 
constituted  by  mind  ( manomaya)”  (Tai.  II.  iii.  1);  “As  com¬ 
pared  with  this,  there  is  another  internal  self  constituted  by 
valid  knowledge  ( vijnanamaya )”  (Tai.  II.  iv).  That  being  so, 
how  can  one  suddenly  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  may  at, 
occurring  in  dnandamaya  (Blissful  One)  alone  implies  abun¬ 
dance  or  that  the  Blissful  One  is  Brahman?  For  this  would  be 
like  fancying  an  old  hag  as  having  her  one  half  young. 

Opponent :  Because  it  is  the  topic  of  Brahman  as  presented  by 
the  mantra  (“Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”). 

Samkara :  Not  so,  for  in  that  case  the  food-self  etc.  would 
also  become  Brahman. 

Here  the  Opponent  (V^ttikara)  says:  It  is  but  proper  that  the 
seifs  made  of  food  etc.  should  not  be  Brahman,  since  other  seifs 
are  mentioned  for  them  which  are  successively  more  internal. 
But  in  the  case  of  the  Blissful  One,  no  internal  self  is  mentioned. 
Thereby  the  Blissful  One  becomes  Brahman.  A  contrary  sup¬ 
position  will  lead  to  the  fault  of  giving  up  something  under 
consideration  and  adopting  some  other  thing  not  under  discus¬ 
sion. 

Samkara :  To  this  we  say:  Although  unlike  in  the  cases  of 
the  food-body  etc.,  the  Upani§ad  does  not  mention  here  any 
inner  self  for  the  Blissful  One,  still  the  Blissful  One  cannot  be 
Brahman,  inasmuch  as  this  text  occurs  in  regard  to  the  Blissful 
One:  “Of  Him  joy  is  verily  the  head,  enjoyment  is  the  right 
side,  hilarity  is  the  left  side,  bliss  is  the  self  (i.e.  the  trunk  of 
the  body),  Brahman  is  the  tail  that  stabilizes  (or  is  the  pedestal)” 
(Tai.  II.  v.  2).  That  being  the  case,  the  Brahman  spoken  of  in 
the  words  of  the  mantra  is  here  presented  in  the  words, 
“Brahman  is  the  tail  that  supports”.  It  is  in  order  to  make  that 
known  that  the  five  sheaths,  counting  from  the  food-self  and 
ending  with  the  Bliss-self  are  imagined.  So  how  can  there  be 
the  fault  of  giving  up  something  relevant  and  taking  up  some¬ 
thing  besides  the  point? 


I.  i.  12-19]  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA$YA  73 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  in  the  text,  “Brahman  is  the 
tail  that  supports”  (Tai.  II.  v.  2),  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  a 
limb  of  the  Blissful  One  just  as  it  is  said  in,  “This  is  the  tail 
that  supports”  in  the  cases  of  the  food-self  and  the  rest?  That 
being  so,  how  can  it  be  known  that  Brahman  appears  here  as 
an  independent  entity  in  Its  own  right? 

Samkara  :  We  say  that  this  is  known  since  Brahman  forms 
the  topic  of  discussion. 

Opponent :  No  harm  accrues  by  way  of  Brahman  ceasing  to 
be  the  topic  even  if  Brahman  is  known  as  a  limb  of  the  Blissful 
One;  for  the  Blissful  One  is  Brahman. 

Samkara :  To  this  we  say:  That  will  involve  an  illogicality 
inasmuch  as  the  very  same  Brahman  will  become  the  whole 
Self,  viz  the  Blissful  One,  and  again  It  will  become  a  part, 
viz  the  supporting  tail.  If  either  of  the  two  has  to  be  accepted, 
then  it  is  reasonable  to  uphold  the  view  that  Brahman  is 
referred  to  in  this  very  text:  “Brahman  is  the  tail  that  supports”, 
for  the  word  Brahman  is  present  there;  but  it  is  not  to  be 
sought  for  in  the  sentence  presenting  the  Blissful  One,  for  we 
miss  the  word  Brahman  there.  Besides,  after  the  statement, 
“Brahman  is  the  supporting  tail”,  it  is  said,  “Apropos  of  this, 
here  is  a  verse:  ‘If  anyone  knows  that  Brahman  is  non-existent, 
then  he  himself  becomes  non-existent.  If  anyone  knows  that 
Brahman  does  exist,  then  they  consider  him  to  be  existing 
by  virtue  of  that  knowledge’”  (Tai.  II.  vi).  Since  in  this  verse 
the  merit  and  demerit  of  believing  in  the  existence  and  non¬ 
existence  of  Brahman  alone  is  mentioned  without  bringing  in 
the  Blissful  One,  it  can  be  understood  that  Brahman  appears 
in  Its  own  right  in  the  text,  “Brahman  is  the  supporting  tail”. 
And  it  is  not  logical  to  entertain  any  doubt  about  the  existence 
or  non-existence  of  the  Blissful  One;  for  as  characterized  by 
joy,  enjoyment,  etc.,  he  is  well  known  in  the  world. 

Opponent :  An  independent  entity  as  that  Brahman  is,  why 
should  It  be  presented  as  a  limb  of  the  Blissful  One  in  the  text, 
“Brahman  is  the  supporting  tail”? 

Smhkara :  That  is  no  defect.  The  purpose  is  not  to  imply 
that  Brahman  is  a  limb,  but  to  show  that  the  Bliss,  that  Brahman 
is,  is  like  a  tail;  It  serves  the  purpose  of  a  stabilizing  (or  support- 


74 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[I.  i.  12-19 


ing)  tail.  What  is  sought  to  be  taught  is  that  the  Bliss,  that 
Brahman  is,  is  the  acme  and  sole  repository  of  all  human  joys, 
as  is  shown  in  another  Upani^ad,  “On  a  particle  of  this  very 
Bliss  other  beings  live”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  32).  Besides,  if  the  Blissful 
One  be  Brahman,  then  a  qualified  Brahman,  conditioned  by 
such  limbs  as  happiness  etc.,  has  to  be  accepted.  But  at  the  end 
of  the  text  the  absolute  Brahman  is  heard  of,  It  being  spoken 
of  as  beyond  speech  and  mind  (in  the  verse):  “The  enlightened 
man  is  not  afraid  of  anything  after  realizing  that  Bliss  of 
Brahman,  failing  to  reach  which,  words  turn  back  along  with 
the  mind”  (Tai.  II.  ix).  Furthermore,  the  assertion  of  an 
abundance  of  Bliss  implies  the  existence  of  sorrow  as  well;  for 
in  the  world,  abundance  is  dependent  on  the  presence  of  a 
little  of  its  opposite.  And  if  that  be  admitted,  then  it  will 
contradict  the  denial  of  anything  except  Itself  in  the  infinite 
Brahman,  as  is  stated  in  the  text,  “That  is  the  Infinite  where 
one  sees  nothing  else,  hears  nothing  else,  and  knows  nothing 
else”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1).  Besides,  from  the  difference  among  the 
various  degrees  of  happiness  in  each  body,  it  follows  that  the 
Blissful  One  (inside  those  bodies)  is  also  different.  But  Brahman 
does  not  differ  in  different  bodies,  since  the  Upani$ad  declares 
Its  infinitude  in,  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”  (Tai. 
II.  i.  1);  another  Upani$ad  also  says,  “The  same  Deity,  that  is  all- 
pervasive  and  the  soul  of  all,  remains  hidden  within  all  beings” 
(Sv.  VI.  11). 

Again,  in  the  Upani$ads  it  is  not  the  repetition  of  the  Blissful 
One  that  is  met  with,  but  rather  the  various  synonyms  of  the 
substantive  portion  of  the  phrase  (viz  Bliss):  “He  is  verily  the 
rasa  (source  of  joy);  for  one  becomes  happy  by  coming  in 
contact  with  that  source  of  joy.  Who  indeed  will  inhale  or 
who  will  exhale,  if  this  Bliss  be  not  there  in  the  supreme  space 
(within  the  heart)?  This  One  indeed  enliveas  people”  (Tai.  II. 
vii),  “This  then  is  an  evaluation  of  Bliss”  (Tai.  II.  viii),  “The 
enlightened  man  is  not  afraid  of  anything  after  realizing  that  Bliss 
of  Brahman”109  (Tai.  II.  ix),  “He  knew  Bliss  as  Brahman”  (Tai. 


109  The  Bliss  that  is  Brahman,  the  “of’  being  used  by  fancying  a 
difference,  as  in  “The  body  of  a  building”. 


I.  i.  12-19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  75 

III.  vi).  Had  the  phrase  “Blissful  One”  been  definitely  ascertained 
to  mean  Brahman,  then  one  could  fancy  the  repetition  of  the 
“Blissful  One”  even  in  the  subsequent  uses  of  the  word  Bliss 
alone.  But  the  Blissful  One,  as  pointed  out  by  us,  is  not 
Brahman,  because  He  has  joy  etc.  as  His  head  etc.,  and  there 
are  other  reasons.  Accordingly,  from  the  use  in  another  Upa- 
ni$ad  of  the  substantive  portion  Bliss  as  a  synonym  for  Brahman 
in  the  text,  “Knowledge,  Bliss,  Brahman”  (Bj\  III.  ix.  28.7),  it 
follows  that  the  word  Bliss  in  such  texts  as,  “if  this  Bliss  be  not 
there  in  the  supreme  space”  (Tai.  II.  vii),  refers  to  Brahman. 
But  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  word  Bliss  is  not  a  repetition 
of  the  phrase  “Blissful  One”. 

It  was  argued  that  the  word  ananda  (Bliss)  is  repeated  toge¬ 
ther  with  the  suffix  mayat  in,  “He  attains  the  Blissful  self”  (Tai. 

II.  viii).  But  this  Blissful  self  does  not  refer  to  Brahman;  for  it 
occurs  in  a  context  of  a  succession  of  attainable  seifs  which  are 
constituted  by  food  etc. 

Opponent :  If  the  Blissful  self  to  be  attained  be  not  Brahman, 
then  the  result  accruing  from  the  attainment  of  Brahman110 
will  remain  unspecified  for  the  enlightened  man. 

Samkara :  That  is  no  defect;  for  from  the  mention  of  the 
attainment  of  the  Blissful  One,  the  result  achievable  by  the 
enlightened  man,  viz  the  attainment  of  the  Brahman  described 
as  the  stabilizing  tail,  becomes  stated  ipso  facto .  Besides,  this 
result  is  elaborated  by  such  texts  as,  “Expressive  of  this,  there 
occurs  this  verse”  (Tai.  II.  ix).  And  the  text,  “He  wished, 
‘Let  me  become  many,  let  me  be  born’”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  2), 
occurring  in  the  proximity  of  the  Blissful  One,  was  quoted  by 
you.  But* this  does  not  lead  to  the  comprehension  of  the  Brah- 
manhood  of  the  Blissful  One;  for  that  text  gets  connected 
with  the  more  proximate  word  Brahman,  present  in  “Brahman 
is  the  supporting  tail”.  And  since  the  subsequent  texts,  as  for 
instance,  “That  is  verily  the  rasa  (source  of  joy)”  (Tai.  II.  vii), 


110  Stated  in  that  context  of  attainment  (Tai.  II).  In  reality,  upasariikra- 
mana  means  transcendence  or  sublation  according  to  Samkara,  and  not 
attainment. 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


76 


[I.i.  12-19 


stem  out  of  this  text,  they  do  not  have  the  Blissful  One  as  their 
purport. 

Opponent :  It  is  unjustifiable  that  “He”  ( sah ,  used  in  the 
masculine  gender)  in  the  text,  “He  wished”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  2), 
should  stand  for  Brahman  (which  is  neuter). 

Samkara  :  That  is  not  damaging;  for  in  the  text,  “From  that 
Self  was  born  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  2),  Brahman  is  referred  to  by 
the  word  Self  (atma)  which  has  the  masculine  gender.  On  the 
contrary,  in  the  section  of  the  Taittirlya  called  “The  knowledge 
received  by  Bhfgu  and  imparted  by  Varu^a”  (III.  vi),  it  is 
stated,  “He  knew  Bliss  as  Brahman”  (ibid.),  where  the  suffix 
may  at  is  not  used,  and  joy  etc.  are  not  mentioned  as  the  head  etc. 
Hence  it  is  but  proper  that  Bliss  should  be  Brahman.  Accord¬ 
ingly,  Brahman  in  Itself  cannot  reasonably  have  joy  etc.  as  Its 
head  etc.  without  assuming  some  conditioning  factor,  however 
tenuous  it  be.  Nor  is  it  the  intention  here  to  reveal  the  condi¬ 
tioned  Brahman,  for  there  is  the  text  showing  the  transcendence 
of  speech  and  mind  (Tai.  II.  ix.  1),  Accordingly,  the  may  at  in 
anandamaya  is  used  to  imply  modification  just  as  much  as  in 
annamaya  etc.,  but  it  is  not  used  to  imply  plenitude. 


So  the  aphorisms  are  to  be  explained  thus: 

12.  (Brahman  is  referred  to  in)  the  Blissful  One 

(etc.),  srWtfkl  owing  to  the  repetition  (of  the  word  Bliss). 


Doubt :  Is  it  the  intention  of  the  text,  “Brahman  is  the  tail 
that  stabilizes”  (Tai.  II.  v),  to  present  Brahman  as  a  limb  of 
the  Blissful  One  or  as  an  independent  entity? 

Opponent :  The  use  of  the  word  tail  leads  to  the  conclusion 
that  It  is  intended  as  a  limb. 

Samkara :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  said,  Anandamayo ’- 
bhydsat.  (This  means  that)  in  the  text,  “The  Blissful  Self”  etc., 
Brahman  is  referred  to  as  an  independent  entity  by  saying, 
“Brahman  is  the  tail  that  stabilizes”.  This  is  gathered  from  the 
repetition;  for  the  absolute  Brahman  alone  is  referred  to  in  the 
verse:  “He  becomes  non-existing”  etc.  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1),  which  is 
a  concluding  reaffirmation  (of  what  was  started  with). 


I.  i.  12-19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  77 

13.  The  interpretation  of  Vikara'sabdanneticenna  prdcurydt  is 
this: 

*T  Not  so  owing  to  the  use  of  a  word  denoting 

limb  5%-^  if  this  be  the  objection,  (then)  not  so, 

(that  word)  having  been  used  owing  to  continuous  presence. 

Your  argument  was  that  “Brahman  is  not  an  independent 
entity,  because  a  limb  is  meant  by  the  word  vikara.111  Because 
the  word  tail,  implying  a  limb,  is  used,  Brahman  cannot  be  an 
independent  entity.”  That  position  has  to  be  refuted.  With 
regard  to  this  we  say:  That  is  nothing  damaging;  for  a  word 
implying  a  limb  can  be  justified  from  the  standpoint  of 
pracurya ,  which  means  the  continuous  presence  (of  an  idea 
in  the  mind),  that  is  to  say,  the  persistent  occurrence  of  the 
word  in  a  context  in  which  the  limbs  are  predominantly  in 
evidence.  After  describing  the  food-self  etc.,  from  the  head  to 
the  tail,  the  turn  came  for  the  enumeration  of  the  head  and 
other  limbs  of  the  Blissful  One;  and  the  idea  of  limbs  being 
predominant  in  the  mind,  the  text  said,  “Brahman  is  the  tail 
that  stabilizes”.  This  was  not  done  from  any  motive  of  showing 
Brahman  as  a  limb  (but  as  a  matter  of  habit),  which  fact 
becomes  obvious  from  the  affirmation  of  Brahman  as  an  inde¬ 
pendent  entity  on  the  ground  of  repetition. 

14.  The  aphorism,  Taddhetuvyapadesacca ,  is  to  be  explained 
thus: 

^  And  owing  to  the  presentation  (of  Brahman) 

as  the  cause  of  all  that  (creation,  including  the  Blissful  One). 

In  the  text,  “He  created  all  this  that  there  is”  (Tai.  II.  vi), 
Brahman  is  shown  as  the  cause  of  all  modifications  inclusive  of 
the  Blissful  One.  Not  that  Brahman,  which  is  the  cause  of  Its 
own  modification,  viz  the  Blissful  One,  can  be  the  latter’s  limb 
in  any  primary  sense. 

The  other  aphorisms  are  also  to  be  understood,  as  far  as 

111  Lit.  “modification”,  but  here  “modified  form”  in  the  derivative 
sense  of  “that  form  through  which  anything  evolves”. 


78  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.  12-19 

possible,  as  speaking  of  Brahman  present  in  the  sentence  about 
the  tail.112 


Topic  7:  The  Being  Inside 

Doubt :  It  is  stated  in  the  Upani$ad:  “Now,  again,  He,  the 
Puru?a  that  is  seen  in  the  sun  is  golden  in  colour;  His  beard  is 
golden,  hair  is  golden,  everything  up  to  the  tip  of  the  nails  is 
golden.  His  eyes  are  like  the  pink  lotus  that  is  itself  as  pink  as 
the  seat  of  a  monkey.  His  name  is  ut  (uprisen).  This  Puru$a, 
that  is  such,  remains  lifted  above  all  sins.  Anyone  meditating 
thus  does  certainly  rise  above  sins”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  6-8);  “This  is 
the  meditation  on  the  divine  plane”  (ibid.);  “Then  follows  the 
meditation  on  the  bodily  plane.  He,  the  Puru§a,  that  is  seen  in 
the  eye”  etc.  (Ch.  I.  vii.  5-8).  Here  arises  a  doubt:  Is  the  Puru$a 
(lit.  person),  who  is  to  be  worshipped  in  the  sun  and  the  eyes, 
a  human  being  who  had  attained  a  high  eminence  on  account 
of  the  perfection  of  his  meditation  and  action,  or  is  He  the 
ever  existing  God?  What  is  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at? 

Opponent :  He  must  be  a  transmigrating  soul. 

Why? 

Because  the  Upani$ad  mentions  his  form.  For  instance,  such  a 
form  as  possession  of  golden  beard  is  mentioned  for  the  person 
in  the  sun.  For  the  person  in  the  eye  also  we  get  that  very 
form  by  a  process  of  extension  shown  in,  “Of  this  One  that  is 
such,  the  form  is  the  same  as  of  that  One”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  5).  Not 
that  the  supreme  Lord  can  reasonably  have  any  form,  for  the 

“^The  remaining  sutras  are  to  be  explained  thus: 

15.  And  IJcT  the  very  Brahman  mentioned  in  the  mantra 

is  declared  (in  the  portion  about  the  tail). 

16.  ?T  The  other  (Blissful  One)  is  not  meant,  .'  owing 

to  impropriety. 

17.  ^  And  owing  to  the  teaching  of  difference  between 

the  two  (viz  that  the  Blissful  One  becomes  joyous  by  getting  the  Bliss 
that  is  Brahman). 

18.  And  spring  owing  to  the  use  of  kama  (i.e.  Bliss)  in  the  sense  of 

Brahman  no  need  of  inferring  the  Blissful  One  to  be 

Brahman. 


I.i.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  79 

Upani$ad  says,  “Soundless,  touchless,  formless,  undiminishing” 
(Ka.  I.  iii.  15).  This  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  mention  of 
a  place  of  residence  in  the  texts:  “He  that  is  in  the  sun”  (Ch.  I. 
vi.  6),  “He  that  is  in  the  eye”  (Ch.  I.  vii.).  No  residence  can 
be  asserted  for  the  supreme  Lord  who  is  without  any  support, 
exists  in  His  own  glory,  and  is  all-pervasive.  There  are  also 
these  Vedic  texts  in  support:  “On  what,  O  venerable  sir,  is  He 
seated?  On  His  own  glory”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1),  “He  is  all- 
pervasive  like  space  and  is  eternal”.  There  is  this  additional 
reason,  that  a  limit  to  His  glory  is  specified  in  the  texts,  “(He 
the  Puru$a  in  the  sun)  rules  over  the  worlds  that  are  above  the 
sun  and  also  over  the  things  enjoyable  to  the  gods”  (Ch.  I.  vi. 
8),  where  a  limit  is  set  to  the  majesty  of  the  person  in  the  sun; 
and  “He,  who  is  such,  rules  over  the  worlds  below  the  eyes  as 
also  over  the  things  enjoyable  to  men”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  6),  where  a 
limit  is  set  to  the  majesty  of  the  person  in  the  eye.  But  it  is 
not  reasonable  that  God’s  majesty  should  have  any  limitation, 
since  it  is  spoken  of  without  any  reservation  in  the  text,  “This 
One  is  the  lord  of  all,  this  One  is  the  ruler  (i.e.  Death)  of  all 
beings,  this  One  is  the  protector  (i.e.  Indra  and  other  gods) 
of  all  beings;  this  One  is  like  a  dam  that  impounds  so  that  these 
worlds  (i.e.  castes  and  stages  of  life  etc.)  may  not  get  mixed  up 
and  destroyed”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22).  Therefore  it  is  not  the  supreme 
Lord  that  resides  in  the  sun  and  the  eyes. 

Veddntin  :  Such  being  the  position,  we  say: 


3RT:  The  One  inside  (is  God),  for  His  qualities 

are  taught. 

20.  The  Being  inside  is  God ,  His  qualities  having  been  taught . 

The  Puru$a113  of  whom  the  Upani^ad  speaks  thus,  “He  who 
is  in  the  sun,  He  who  is  in  the  eye”  (Ch.  I.  vi,  I.  vii),  must  be 
God  Himself,  and  not  any  transmigratory  soul. 

mPuru$a  is  the  all-pervasive  entity,  seen  as  a  Person  by  the  worshippers. 
Golden  in  that  context  means,  made  of  light,  i.e.  self-effulgent. 


80 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.  i.  20 


Why? 

Because  His  qualities  are  taught.  For  it  is  God’s  qualities  that 
are  taught  here.  Thus  having  revealed  the  name  of  the  Person 
in  the  sun  by  saying,  “His  name  is  ut  (the  uprisen)”  (Ch.  I. 
vi.  7),  the  derivation  of  that  name  is  shown  as  arising  from 
the  fact  of  remaining  free  from  sin,  in  the  text,  “This  Puru$a 
that  is  such,  remains  lifted  above  all  sins”.  And  that  name,  of 
which  the  derivation  has  been  shown,  is  extended  to  the  Person 
in  the  eye  by  saying.  “He  has  the  same  name  as  the  other  One 
has”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  5).  Freedom  from  all  sins  is  declared  about  the 
supreme  Self  alone  in,  “That  which  is  the  Self  beyond  all  sins” 
(Ch.  VIII.  vii),  and  such  sentences.  Similarly  in  the  text,  “He 
(the  Person  in  the  eye)  is  the  Rk-mantra,  the  Soma-mantra,  the 
uktha  (a  kind  of  hymn),  the  Yajur-mantra,  the  three  Vedas” 
(Ch.  I.  vii.  5),  the  Upani$ad  points  out  the  identity  of  the 
Person  in  the  eye  with  Rk,  Soma,  etc.;  and  that  is  possible  only 
in  the  case  of  the  supreme  Lord,  it  being  reasonable  that  He 
should  be  everything  by  virtue  of  His  being  the  source  of  all. 
Again,  commencing  with  the  Rk  and  Soma  mantras  that  are 
the  same  as  the  earth,  fire,  and  so  on,  in  the  divine  context,  and 
speech,  vital  force,  and  so  on,  in  the  physical  context,  it  is 
said,  “Of  Him  the  Rk  and  Sama  mantras  are  two  bodily  joints. 
This  is  in  the  divine  context”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  8).  Similarly  in  the 
bodily  context,  “He  (the  Person  in  the  eye)  has  the  same  two 
joints  as  the  Person  in  the  sun”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  5).  This  becomes 
proper  only  if  He  is  the  Self  of  all.  And  the  text,  “Therefore 
when  these  people  play  on  the  Vina  (lute),  they  sing  of  Him; 
and  hence  they  become  prosperous”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  6),  shows  how 
He  is  present  as  music  even  in  the  human  songs.  This  can  be 
so  if  God  is  accepted  as  that  Person,  as  is  shown  in  the  Bhaga- 
vad-Glta,  “Whatever  being  there  is  great,  prosperous,  or 
powerful,  that  know  thou  to  be  a  product  of  a  part  of  My 
splendour”  (X.  41).  Besides,  the  absolute  power  of  ruling  over 
the  worlds  and  desires  that  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani§ad,  points 
to  God.  In  answer  to  the  objection  that  the  reference  in  the 
Upani$ad  to  such  forms  as  the  possession  of  golden  beard  etc. 
does  not  befit  God,  we  say:  Even  for  God  there  may  be  forms 
created  at  His  will  out  of  Maya  for  the  sake  of  favouring  the 


I.x.21] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


81 


aspirants,  as  is  declared  in  the  Smjti,  “O  Narada,  it  is  a  Maya, 
created  by  Me,  that  you  see  Me  in  this  form  possessed  of  all 
the  substances  and  qualities.  You  must  not  understand  Me 
thus”.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  divine  aspect  bereft  of  all 
qualities  is  spoken  of,  then  the  relevant  text  runs  thus:  “Sound¬ 
less,  touchless,  formless,  and  undiminishing”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  15), 
and  so  on.  But  since  God  is  the  cause  of  everything,  He  is 
sometimes  spoken  of,  for  the  sake  of  adoration,  as  possessed  of 
certain  mundane  qualities,  as  in,  “He  is  possessed  of  all  (good) 
action,  all  (good)  desires,  all  (good)  smell,  all  (good)  tastes” 
(Ch.  III.  xiv.  2),  and  so  on.  In  the  same  way  there  can  be  the 
mention  of  His  golden  beard.  As  for  the  criticism  that  He 
cannot  be  God,  since  a  residence  is  mentioned,  we  say,  even 
for  the  One  who  is  established  in  His  own  glory,  there  can 
be  an  instruction  about  some  seat  for  the  sake  of  adoration; 
for  being  all-pervasive  like  space,  He  can  very  well  dwell  inside 
everything.  The  mention  of  the  limitation  to  His  majesty  also 
occurs  with  reference  to  the  bodily  and  divine  contexts  for 
the  sake  of  worship.  Therefore  God  Himself  is  spoken  of  as 
residing  within  the  eye  and  the  sun. 

^  And  owing  to  the  mention  of  difference 

different. 

21.  And  God  is  different  (from  the  individual  being)  owing 
to  the  mention  of  difference. 

God,  the  internal  Ruler,  does  exist  as  an  entity  different 
from  the  individual  souls  identifying  themselves  with  the  bodies 
of  the  sun  etc.;  for  their  dissimilarity  is  stated  in  another 
Upani$ad,  in  these  words:  “He  who  inhabits  the  sun,  but  is 
within  it,  whom  the  sun  does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the 
sun,  and  who  controls  the  sun  from  within,  is  the  internal 
Ruler,  your  own  immortal  Self”  (Bf  III.  vii.  9).  By  saying, 
“within  the  sun”  and  “whom  the  sun  does  not  know”,  it  is 
clearly  shown  that  the  internal  Ruler  is  different  from  the  sun 
which  is  the  knower  and  which  is  an  individual  soul  identifying 
6 


82 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.i.  21 


itself  with  the  intellect.114  It  is  but  reasonable  from  the  simi¬ 
larity  of  the  Upani$ads  that  this  very  entity  (of  Bj\  III.  vii.  9) 
should  be  the  Person  mentioned  here  (in  Ch.  I.  vi.  6-7)  as 
inside  the  sun.  Therefore  it  is  proved  that  God  Himself  is 
spoken  of  here. 


Topic  8:  Space 

Doubt  :  The  Chandogya  Upani$ad  states  thus:  “(Salavatya 
asked):  ‘What  is  the  goal  of  this  world?’  He  (Pravahaua 
Jaivali)  answered,  ‘Space.  For  all  things  certainly  originate 
from  Space;  and  they  merge  by  moving  towards  Space.  For 
Space  is  certainly  greater  than  all  these,  Space  is  their  supreme 
goal’  ”  (Ch.  I.  ix.  1).  With  regard  to  this  the  doubt  arises:  Does 
the  word  space  mean  the  supreme  Brahman  or  the  material 
space? 

Why  does  the  doubt  arise? 

Because  the  word  is  used  in  both  senses.  The  word  space  is 
well  known  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  natural  space  in  the 
Vedas  and  common  parlance;  and  at  times  it  is  found  to  be 
used  for  Brahman  also,  as  for  instance  in  such  places  as  the 
following,  where  Brahman  stands  out  as  the  well  determined 
meaning  from  the  text  that  follows  or  from  the  mention  of 
some  distinguishing  characteristics:  “If  this  Space  that  is  Bliss 
(i.e.  Brahman)  had  not  been  there”  (or  “If  this  Bliss  were  not 
there  in  Space”)  (Tai.  II.  vii),  “Space  indeed  is  the  accom- 
plisher  (of  the  origin  and  continuance)  of  name  and  form.  That 
in  which  they  exist  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv).  Hence  this 
doubt.  What  is  the  reasonable  conclusion  here? 

Opponent :  It  must  be  the  material  space. 

Why? 

For  that  occurs  to  the  mind  instantaneously,  owing  to  more 
familiar  use;  and  this  word  space  cannot  be  understood  to 
imply  both  these  equally,  for  that  will  lead  to  its  having  many 
meanings.  Therefore  the  word  space  must  have  a  secondary 
meaning  when  it  is  applied  to  Brahman,  Brahman  being  similar 

114  The  instrument  of  cognition,  owing  to  identity  with  which  the 
soul  thinks,  “I  know”. 


I.  i.  22] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


83 


to  space  as  regards  many  such  qualities  as  pervasiveness.  More¬ 
over,  when  a  primary  meaning  is  admissible,  any  secondary 
meaning  is  not  to  be  accepted;  and  here  it  is  possible  to  accept 
space  in  the  primary  sense. 

Objection :  If  the  material  space  be  the  meaning,  the  comple¬ 
mentary  portion  of  the  passage  becomes  illogical,  which  runs  as 
follows:  “All  things  certainly  originate  from  Space”  etc.  (Ch. 
I.  ix.  1). 

Opponent :  That  is  no  fault;  for  even  material  space  can 
become  the  cause  (of  all)  by  evolving  into  air  etc.  in  succession; 
for  it  is  known  (from  the  Upani$ad),  “From  the  Self,  that  is 
such,  originated  space,  from  space  arose  air,  from  air  fire” 
(Tai.  II.  i),  and  so  on.  As  for  being  greater  and  the  ultimate 
goal,  that  is  possible  even  for  the  material  space  with  relation 
to  the  other  elements.  By  the  word  space,  therefore,  the  material 
space  is  meant. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  position,  we  say: 

Space  (is  Brahman),  owing  to  the  indicatory 

mark  of  that. 

22.  Space  ( akdsa)  is  Brahman y  for  Brahman? s  indicatory  mark 
is  in  evidence . 

By  the  word  Space  here  we  should  understand  Brahman. 

Why? 

Because  a  mark  indicating  Brahman  is  in  evidence  in,  “For 
all  things  originate  from  Space  to  be  sure”  etc.  (Ch.  I.  ix.  1). 
For  it  is  an  established  fact  in  the  Upani$ads  that  all  things 
originate  from  the  supreme  Brahman. 

Opponent :  Space,  the  element,  has  also  been  shown  as  becom¬ 
ing  the  cause  by  evolving  through  a  succession  of  air  etc. 

Vedantin :  Yes,  it  has  been  shown.  Yet  if  Brahman  be  not 
taken  into  account  as  the  origin,  the  emphasis  in  the  phrase 
“certainly  from  Space”  and  the  word  “all”  as  a  qualification  of 
“things”  cannot  be  reconciled.  So  also  “They  merge  by  moving 
towards  Space”  is  an  indicator  of  Brahman.  And  the  fact  of 


84 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.i.  22 


being  greater  and  the  ultimate  goal  is  stated  in,  “For  Space  is 
certainly  greater  than  these,  and  Space  is  their  ultimate  goal” 
(ibid.).  For  absolute  greatness  is  declared  about  the  supreme 
Self  alone  in,  “Greater  than  the  earth,  greater  than  the  sky, 
greater  than  heaven,  greater  thru  all  these  worlds”  (Ch.  III. 
xiv.  3).  Similarly  the  fact  of  being  the  supreme  goal  is  more  in 
accord  with  the  supreme  Self,  It  being  the  ultimate  cause.  In 
support  of  this  is  the  Upani$adic  text:  “Knowledge,  Bliss, 
Brahman,  the  supreme  goal  of  the  distributor  of  wealth  as 
well  as  of  him  who  has  realized  Brahman  and  lives  in  It”  (Bf. 
III.  ix.  28.7).  Moreover,  Jaivali,  who  condemns  Salavatya’s  posi¬ 
tion  by  pointing  out  the  defect  of  limitation,  resorts  to  Space 
with  a  view  to  speaking  of  something  unlimited.  And  then 
attributing  the  similarity  of  Space  to  Udgitha ,  he  says,  “This 
Udgitha  (i.e.  its  part  Om)  is  this  Space,  and  it  is  great  and  higher 
than  all  that  is  high.115  This  One  that  is  s  h  is  infinite”  (Ch.  I. 
ix.  2).  That  infinity  is  also  an  indication  of  Brahman.  As  for 
the  argument  that  the  material  space  occurs  to  the  mind 
because  of  familiar  use,  we  say  that  though  it  may  occur  to 
the  mind  first,  it  cannot  be  accepted  after  noticing  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  Brahman  evident  in  the  complementary  portion. 
We  showed  that  the  word  space  occurs  to  signify  Brahman  as 
well,  as  for  instance  in,  “Space  indeed  is  the  accomplisher 
(revealer)  of  name  and  form”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1).  Similarly  it 
is  seen  that  the  synonyms  of  space  are  also  used  for  Brahman 
in  such  places  as,  “The  Vedas  are  the  authoritative  revealers 
of  the  absolutely  immutable  Vyoman  (Sky,  Brahman)  on 
which  all  the  gods  subsist”  (R.  V.  I.  clxiv.  39),  “This  is  that 
knowledge  received  by  Bhj-gu,  which  is  established  in  the 
supreme  Vyoviari ”  (Tai.  III.  vi),  “Ow  Kam  (i.e.  Bliss)  is 
Brahman,  Kham  (Space)  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  x.  5),  “Om  is 
that  Kham  (Space) — the  eternal  Space”  (Br.  V.  i).  Even  the 
word  space  occurring  at  the  beginning  of  the  sentence  should 
be  understood  to  signify  Brahman,  owing  to  the  trend  of  the 
complementary  portion  of  the  text.  For  such  a  word  as  fire 


^Because  Om,  a  part  of  Udgitha ,  is  great,  it  being  the  essence  etc.  of 
all  and  superior  to  all  other  letters. 


I.  i.  23 ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  85 

occurring  in  the  statement,  “The  fire  reads  the  hymn”,  at  the 
beginning  of  a  text,  is  seen  to  mean  a  brilliant  boy  reading  the 
hymn.  Hence  it  is  concluded  that  the  word  Space  means 
Brahman. 


Topic  9:  Prana 

In  the  course  of  discussing  the  meditation  on  Udgitha ,  it  is 
noticed  in  the  Upani$ad  that,  after  starting  with,  “O  chanter 
of  Prastdva  (i.e.  an  introductory  part  of  Sama  song),  should 
you  chant  it  in  my  presence  without  knowing  the  deity  thereof, 
your  head  will  fall”118  (Ch.  I.  x.  9),  the  question  (by  Cakra- 
yaoa)  occurs,  “Which  is  that  deity?”  And  “He  (U$asti)  replies, 
‘It  is  Prana  (lit.  vital  force),  for  all  these  things  proceed  towards 
and  merge  in  Prana  and  from  Prana  they  emerge.  This  is  that 
deity  that  is  intimately  associated  with  Prastdvi  ”,  (Ch.  I.  xi. 
4-5).  The  doubt  arising  from  this  and  its  solution  are  to  be 
understood  in  accordance  with  the  earlier  pattern. 

Doubt :  The  word  Prana  is  found  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of 
Brahman  in  such  texts  as,  “O  amiable  one,  the  mind  is  tethered 
to  Prana”111  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  2),  uPrd7ia  of  Prana”116  (Br.  IV.  iv. 
18).  But  the  more  familiar  use  in  the  world  as  well  as  in  the 
Vedas  is  in  the  sense  of  the  vital  force  that  is  a  form  of  air 
(i.e.  energy).  Therefore  the  doubt  arises  here  as  to  which  of 
the  two  should  be  reasonably  accepted  here. 

Opponent :  It  is  proper  to  accept  the  modification  of  air 
called  the  vital  force  having  a  fivefold  function,  for  it  was 
pointed  out  that  the  word  Prana  is  more  familiarly  known  to 
imply  that. 

Objection :  Here  also  it  is  proper  to  accept  Brahman,  for 
Its  characteristics  are  in  evidence  just  as  before.  Here  also  the 
entry  and  emergence  of  all  the  elements,  noticeable  in  the  com¬ 
plementary  portion,  bear  witness  to  God’s  activity. 

Opponent :  Not  so,  for  even  in  case  of  the  chief  vital  force 

116  This  is  U$asti’s  warning  to  Cakrayana. 

117  In  deep  sleep,  the  soul,  having  the  mind  as  its  limiting  adjunct,  becomes 
unified  with  Prana  or  Brahman. 

Prana  or  Brahman  imparts  existence  and  expression  to  the  vital 
force. 


86  BRAHMA  - SCTRA  - BHA§YA  [Li. 23 

(in  the  mouth),  the  entry  and  emergence  of  all  the  elements  are 
noticeable  in,  “When  a  man  is  in  deep  sleep,  then  speech  enters 
into  Prana ,  the  eye  enters  into  Prana ,  the  ear  enters  into  Prana, 
the  mind  enters  into  Prana.  When  he  wakes  up  again,  they  re- 
emerge  from  Prana  itself”119  (S.  B.  X.  iii.  3.6).  It  is  a  fact  of 
common  experience  that  the  functions  of  the  senses  and  organs 
get  merged  in  the  vital  function  that  does  not  get  lost  in  sleep; 
and  at  the  time  of  waking,  they  rise  out  of  Prana.  And  because 
the  senses  and  organs  are  the  quintessence  of  the  elements,  it  is 
nothing  contradictory  that  the  trend  of  the  complementary 
portion  of  the  text  should  point  to  the  entry  and  emergence 
of  the  elements  into  and  out  of  the  vital  force.  Moreover,  the 
Sun  and  Food,  who  are  the  deities  of  Udgitha  and  Pratihara 
(portions  of  the  Sama  song)  respectively,  are  mentioned  after 
Praria.  Not  that  they  have  Brahmanhood.  Because  of  this  simi¬ 
larity  with  them,  Prana  also  is  not  Brahman. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorisc  says: 

3T3  ^  SIFT  II  ^  II 

3RL  On  that  very  ground  STT^*.  Prana. 

23.  On  that  very  ground ,  Prana  (is  Brahman). 

The  reason  “Because  Brahman’s  indicatory  mark  is  in  evid¬ 
ence”  was  advanced  under  the  earlier  aphorism.  “On  that  very 
ground”  of  the  presence  of  the  indicatory  mark  of  Brahman, 
the  word  Prctna  also  should  mean  the  supreme  Brahman.  For 
the  association  of  Prana  with  the  characteristics  of  Brahman  is 
met  with  in  the  text,  “All  the  things  proceed  towards  and 
merge  in  Prana  and  from  It  they  emerge”  (Ch.  I.  xi.  5),  where 
the  mention  of  the  origin  and  dissolution  of  all  things,  stated 
to  be  proceeding  from  Prana 9  proves  that  Prana  is  Brahman. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  the  mention  of  the  entry 
and  emergence  is  reconcilable  even  if  the  chief  Prana  be 
accepted,  this  being  a  matter  of  experience  during  sleep  and 
waking. 

u6Eye  etc.  stand  for  the  corresponding  organs  which  are  the  products 
of  the  elements. 


I.  i.  23  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  87 

To  this  we  (V edantins)  say:  During  sleep  and  waking  we 
notice  only  the  entry  and  the  emergence  of  the  senses  and 
organs  into  and  out  of  Prana ,  but  not  of  all  the  elements, 
whereas  the  entry  and  the  emergence  of  all  the  things,  presided 
over  by  the  individual  souls,  along  with  the  bodies  and  senses, 
are  spoken  of  here,  as  is  seen  in  the  text,  “All  these  things 
certainly”  etc.  (Ch.  I.  xi.  5).  Even  if  this  text,  mentioning  all 
things,  signifies  the  elements,  the  characteristics  of  Brahman  are 
found  to  be  fully  in  accord. 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  in  the  following  text  we 
come  across  the  entry  and  emergence,  during  sleep  and  waking, 
of  the  senses  together  with  their  objects  into  and  out  of 
Prana} — “When  a  sleeping  man  has  no  dream  whatsoever,  and 
he  becomes  one  with  this  Prana ,  then  into  that  Prana  enters 
speech  together  with  all  the  names”  (Kau.  III.  3). 

Vedantin :  Even  there  the  word  Prana  means  Brahman,  for  the 
characteristic  of  Brahman  is  in  evidence.120 

And  the  argument  is  baseless  that  Prana  is  not  Brahman 
owing  to  the  use  of  the  word  in  association  (or  in  the  proximity 
of)  Food  and  the  Sun;  for  mere  proximity  counts  for  nothing 
when  the  obvious  meaning  of  Prana  is  known  to  be  Brahman 
from  the  trend  of  the  complementary  text.  And  the  argument 
was  advanced  that  the  more  usual  meaning  of  Prana  is  the  vital 
force  having  a  fivefold  function;  that  has  to  be  met  in  the  same 
way  as  in  the  case  of  the  word  Space.121  Therefore  it  is  con¬ 
cluded  that  the  Deity  of  Prastdva  is  Brahman. 

Some  people  think  that  this  aphorism  alludes  to  the  texts, 
uPrdna  of  Prana ”  (Vital  force  of  vital  force)  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  18), 
and  “O  amiable  one,  the  mind  is  tethered  to  Prana  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  2).  That  too  is  unjustifiable,  since  there  is  no  reasonable 
scope  for  doubt  (in  these  two  texts)  in  the  face  of  the  differ- 

120  Because  Prana  is  shown  to  be  non-different  from  the  individual  soul, 
at  the  same  time  that  It  is  the  place  of  merger  of  all  things.  Again,  Prana , 
considered  as  a  transformation  of  elements,  cannot  have  the  elements 
merged  in  itself. 

321  Since  emphasis  is  placed  on  Prana  by  saying,  uPrana  only”,  and  since 
it  is  declared  to  be  the  material  source  of  all  things,  therefore  it  is 
Brahman. 


88  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  LI.  i.  23 

ence  in  words  and  the  force  of  the  context.  Just  as  in  the  use, 
“The  father  of  the  father”,  it  is  clear  that  the  grandfather  who 
is  indicated  by  the  nominative  case  is  different  from  the  one 
indicated  by  the  sixth  case  (with  of);  so  also  in  “the  Vital 
force  of  the  vital  force”  it  becomes  apparent  from  the  differ¬ 
ence  in  words,  that  some  Vital  force,  different  from  the 
familiar  one,  is  referred  to;  for  the  very  same  thing  cannot  be 
indicated  to  be  different  from  itself  by  saying:  “He  is  his”. 
Moreover,  it  is  to  be  understood  (from  the  context)  that  if 
something  is  referred  to  by  a  different  word  in  its  own  context, 
it  must  be  itself  alone  that  is  thus  spoken  of.  For  instance, 
when  under  the  topic  of  the  Jyoti&oma  sacrifice  it  is  stated: 
“In  every  spring  one  should  perform  the  Jyotis  sacrifice”,  the 
word  Jyotis  must  mean  Jyoti&oma.  Similarly  in  a  context  in 
which  the  supreme  Brahman  comes  under  discussion,  it  is 
stated:  “O  amiable  one,  the  mind  is  tethered  to  Prana ”.  This 
being  the  case,  how  can  this  Prapa  mean  a  mere  modification 
of  air?  Accordingly,  since  there  is  no  scope  for  doubt,  the 
above  passages  are  not  to  be  alluded  to  (in  this  connection). 
But  the  doubt  does  arise  about  the  Prana  which  is  the  deity  of 
Prastava;  and  the  relevant  doubt  and  its  solution  have  been 
shown  above. 


Topic  10:  Light 

II  II 

Wild:  Light  (is  Brahman)  owing  to  the  men¬ 

tion  of  feet. 

24.  Light  is  Brahmdn  because  of  the  mention  of  feet. 

Doubt :  The  Upani$ad  says:  “Then  that  (Light)  that  shines 
in  the  excellent  unsurpassable  worlds  above  this  heaven,  above 
all  beings,  and  above  all  the  worlds,  is  this  same  Light  that  is 
within  a  human  being”  (Ch.  III.  xiii.  7).  With  regard  to  this 
the  doubt  arises:  Does  the  Light  here  refer  to  the  Light  of  the 
sun  etc.  or  does  it  mean  the  supreme  Self?  It  has  been  said  that 
though  the  connotation  of  a  word  be  different,  it  may  refer 


I.  i.  24]  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA§YA  89 

to  Brahman  if  Brahman’s  characteristics  are  in  evidence.  This 
discussion  relates  to  whether  those  characteristics  themselves 
exist  here  or  not.  What  should  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  is  that  the  light  of  the  sun  etc. 
is  meant  by  the  word  light. 

Why? 

Because  of  familiar  use.  It  is  well  known  that  the  two  words 
light  and  darkness  refer  to  opposite  things.  Nocturnal  gloom 
etc.,  hindering  the  functioning  of  the  eye,  are  known  as  dark¬ 
ness;  and  the  solar  rays  etc.  that  help  vision  are  called  light. 
Similarly  the  word  “shines”  in  the  text  is  in  vogue  with  regard 
to  the  sun  etc.  Brahman,  devoid  of  colour  etc.,  cannot  answer 
to  the  text  “shines”  in  the  primary  sense.  And  an  additional 
argument  is  the  reference  in  the  text  to  heaven  as  a  limit.  For 
Brahman,  the  source  of  all  that  moves  and  does  not  move, 
and  the  Self  of  all  (i.e.  the  all-pervasive  entity),  cannot  have 
heaven  as  a  limit,  whereas  any  light  that  is  a  product  (of 
Brahman)  can  have  heaven  as  its  limit.  And  the  text  in  the 
brahmma  (explanatory)  portion  in  the  Upani$ad  says,  “the 
light  above  this  heaven”. 

Objection :  Heaven  as  a  limitation  is  irreconcilable  even  with 
the  created  light,  for  it  is  experienced  everywhere.  So  let  this 
mean  the  first-born  unmixed  fire. 

Opponent :  No,  for  the  unmixed  light  serves  no  purpose.122 

Objection :  The  mere  fact  of  becoming  an  object  of  (no¬ 
tional)  meditation  is  the  purpose  that  it  serves. 

Opponent :  No,  for  the  sun  etc.  are  enjoined  as  objects  of 
meditation  only  when  they  serve  some  other  purpose  (apart 
from  being-  an  object  of  meditation).  Besides,  the  Upani$ad 
speaks  (of  all  the  elements)  without  any  reservation  in  the 
text:  “Let  me  make  a  threefold  mixture  of  each  one  of  them 
(i.e.  light,  water,  and  earth)”123  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  3).  And  it  is  not 
a  familiar  fact  that  even  the  unmixed  fire  has  heaven  as  its 

128  Pure  light  cannot  be  seen.  Gross  light  is  a  mixture  of  the  three 
elements — light,  water,  and  earth — though  light  predominates.  So  also 
with  other  gross  elements. 

128  That  is  to  say,  there  can  be  no  unmixed  light  after  creation  takes 
place. 


90  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  i.  24 

limitation.  So  let  the  mixed  fire  itself  be  the  meaning  of  the 
word  light. 

Objection :  Did  we  not  point  out  that  the  (mixed)  light  of 
fire  etc.  is  met  with  even  below  heaven? 

Opponent :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  for  though  the  (gross) 
light  spreads  everywhere,  it  is  nothing  contradictory  to  accept 
for  meditation  a  certain  portion  of  it  spreading  above  heaven. 
But  it  is  not  proper  to  imagine  any  specific  place  for  the  partless 
Brahman.  Besides,  the  mention  of  many  places  of  residence  in 
the  text,  “that  which  shines  in  the  excellent,  unsurpassable 
worlds,  above  all  the  worlds”  (Ch.  III.  xiii.  7),  is  more  in 
keeping  with  the  created  light.  Moreover,  in  the  text,  “This  is 
the  same  light  that  is  within  a  human  being”  (ibid.),  it  is  seen 
that  the  supreme  light  is  superimposed  on  the  fire  in  the 
stomach;  and  superimpositions  are  possible  in  cases  of  similarity, 
as  for  instance  in,  “Of  this  Being  who  is  in  the  solar  orb,  the 
syllable  bhur  is  the  head,  for  the  head  is  one,  and  this  syllable 
is  one”  (Bj\  V.  v.  3).  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  fire  in 
the  stomach  is  not  Brahman,  for  it  is  mentioned  as  possessed 
of  heat  and  sound  in  the  Upanisadic  texts,  “Of  this  Being,  this 
is  the  perceptual  evidence  (that  one  feels  this  bodily  heat  by 
touch)”,  “Of  this  Being  this  is  the  audible  evidence  (that  one 
hears  a  sound  like  bellowing  inside,  by  plugging  the  ears)”  (Ch. 
III.  xiii.  7).  Furthermore,  there  is  the  Upanisadic  text,  “This 
entity,  that  is  such,  should  be  meditated  on  as  seen  and  heard” 
(ibid.).  Again,  this  is  not  Brahman,  because  the  result  stated  in, 
“He  who  meditates  thus  becomes  a  cynosure  and  a  famous  man” 
(ibid.),  is  insignificant,  whereas  the  meditation  on  Brahman  is 
intended  for  some  great  result.  Unlike  what  is  found  in  the 
case  of  Prana  and  Space,  there  is  nothing  here  in  the  context 
of  light  itself  that  can  be  a  characteristic  of  Brahman.  Nor  is 
Brahman  pointed  out  in  the  previous  text,  “Gayatri  is  surely 
all  these  beings”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  1),  the  metre  Gayatri  being 
mentioned  there  by  name.  Even  if  it  be  conceded  somehow 
that  Brahman  is  presented  in  the  previous  text,  still  the  identity 
is  not  recognizable  here;  for  heaven  occurs  as  a  habitation  in 
the  earlier  sentence,  “His  three  feet  are  in  heaven”  (Ch.  III.  xii. 
6),  whereas  it  occurs  as  a  limitation  in,  “the  light  shining  above 


I.  i.  24]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  91 

heaven,,  (Ch.  III.  xiii.  7).  Accordingly,  the  natural  light  has  to 
be  accepted  here. 

Vedantin :  This  contingency  having  arisen,  we  say,  Brahman 
is  to  be  understood  here  by  the  word  Light. 

Why? 

“Because  of  the  mention  of  feet.”124  For  in  the  previous 
text.  Brahman  was  shown  as  possessed  of  four  feet  in  the 
mantra ,  “That  much  (i.e.  the  whole  creation)  is  His  glory; 
but  Puru§a  is  greater  than  that.  All  things  constitute  only  one 
of  His  feet.  His  three  feet  that  are  immortal  are  in  heaven” 
(Ch.  III.  xii.  6).  Those  very  three  feet  of  that  four-footed 
Brahman,  that  are  immortal  and  were  shown  in  the  mantra  as 
constituting  that  aspect  of  Brahman  associated  with  heaven, 
can  be  recognized  here  also  as  spoken  of  in  association  with 
heaven.  Should  any  one  give  that  up  and  resort  to  natural 
light,  one  will  be  open  to  the  charge  of  rejecting  something 
under  discussion  and  taking  up  something  extraneous.  Not 
only  is  the  topic  of  Brahman  continued  in  the  passage  about 
Light,  it  will  be  pursued  even  in  the  succeeding  meditation 
called  the  Sandilya-vidya  (Ch.  III.  xiv).  Therefore  Brahman  is 
to  be  understood  here  from  the  word  Light. 

As  for  the  contention  that  the  words  light  and  shine  are 
more  in  vogue  in  connection  with  the  created  light,  that  is 
nothing  damaging.  For  once  we  arrive  at  Brahman  with  the 
help  of  the  context,  those  two  words,  used  here  without  any 
specific  exclusion  of  Brahman,  can  refer  to  Brahman  indicated 
figuratively  by  the  shining,  created  light.  Besides,  there  is  the 
mantra  text,  “Lighted  up  by  whose  effulgence  the  sun  shines” 
(Tai.  Br.  III.  xii.  9.7).  Or  it  may  be  said  that  this  word  Light 
is  not  used  to  mean  the  light  favouring  the  act  of  seeing,  for 
it  is  found  to  be  used  in  other  senses  as  well  as  in,  “It  is 
through  the  light  of  speech  (i.e.  words  of  mouth)  that  he 
sits,  (goes  out,  works,  and  returns)”  (in  deep  darkness)  (Br. 
IV.  iii.  5),  “The  mind  becomes  a  light  to  those  who  drink 
ghee”  (Tai.  Br.  I.  vi.  3.3).  Accordingly,  whatever  reveals  other 

124  Because  of  the  mention  of  corona  in  the  sense  of  “foot”  and  not 
“conduct”. 


92  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  i.  24 

things  is  referred  to  by  the  word  light.  Hence  Brahman,  which 
is  consciousness  by  nature,  can  also  be  referred  to  by  the  word 
Light  in  that  sense,  inasmuch  as  It  reveals  the  whole  universe. 
This  is  also  borne  out  by  the  Upani§adic  text:  “He  shining, 
everything  shines  accordingly;  by  His  effulgence  all  this  shines 
diversely”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  10),  “Upon  that  immortal  Light  of  all 
lights  the  gods  meditate  as  longevity”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  16). 

There  was  the  objection  that  it  is  improper  for  Brahman  to 
have  heaven  as  a  limitation.  To  this  we  say:  Even  in  the  case 
of  the  omnipptent  Brahman,  it  is  nothing  incongruous  to  assume 
a  certain  location  for  the  sake  of  worship. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  it  is  impossible  to  fancy  any 
locus  for  Brahman  that  has  no  parts? 

Vedantin  :  That  defect  does  not  arise;  for  it  is  reasonable 
to  assume  a  locus  for  Brahman  owing  to  association  with 
limiting  adjuncts.  Accordingly,  we  find  in  the  Upani$ads 
certain  meditations  on  Brahman  in  association  with  certain 
places  as  in,  “in  the  sun”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  6),  “in  the  eye”  (Ch.  I. 
vii.  5),  “in  the  heart”  (Ch.  III.  xiii.  7).  Hereby  is  explained  the 
plurality  of  abodes  as  in  “above  all  beings”  (ibid.). 

Again,  it  was  argued:  The  light  above  heaven  must  also  be 
this  natural  light,  because  it  is  superimposed  on  the  natural  fire 
that  can  be  inferred  to  be  existing  in  the  stomach  on  the  ground 
of  the  perception  of  its  heat  and  sound.  That  too  is  unreason¬ 
able,  since  even  for  the  supreme  Brahman,  the  fire  in  the 
stomach  can  be  as  good  a  symbol  as  name  etc.  As  for  the  facts 
of  being  seen  and  heard  of  (i.e.  famous)  mentioned  in,  “It  is  to 
be  meditated  on  as  the  seen  and  the  heard  of”,  that  too  is  from 
the  point  of  view  of  symbolic  worship.125  And  the  argument 
was  advanced  that  the  Light  is  not  Brahman,  because  the  result 
(of  meditation  as  stated  above)  is  meagre.  That  too  is  baseless, 
for  there  is  no  reason  for  any  such  hard  and  fast  rule  that 
Brahman  is  to  be  resorted  to  for  certain  definite  results  and 
not  for  others.126  Only  one  kind  of  result  (viz  liberation)  is  to 
be  understood  where  the  supreme  Brahman,  devoid  of  contact 

125  Hence  the  attributes  do  not  really  belong  to  Brahman. 

130  The  Upanisads  declare  that  people  get  whatever  results  they  want 
from  the  worship  of  Brahman. 


Li.  25] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA$YA 


93 


with  all  kinds  of  distinctions,  is  taught  as  the  Self.  But  where 
Brahman  is  taught  as  having  certain  qualities  or  certain  symbols, 
then  are  mentioned  many  results,  high  and  low,  which  are 
included  within  this  world  as  is  shown  in  such  texts  as  “(The 
great  birthless  Self  is)  the  eater  of  food  and  the  giver  of  wealth 
(i.e.  fruits  of  work).  He  who  knows  It  as  such,  receives  wealth” 
(Bj*.  IV.  iv.  24).  Although  the  Light  in  the  sentence  under 
consideration  has  nothing  specifically  characteristic  of  Brahman, 
still  the  characteristic,  as  seen  in  the  previous  text,  has  to  be 
accepted.  That  is  why  the  aphorist  says,  “Light  is  Brahman, 
because  of  the  mention  of  feet”. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  it  be  proper  that  the  passage 
about  Light  should  be  torn  out  of  its  own  context  and  mis¬ 
applied  just  because  it  occurs  in  the  proximity  of  Brahman 
mentioned  in  another  sentence? 

Vedantin :  That  fault  does  not  arise;  for  the  pronoun  “that” 
has  the  force  of  calling  up  to  the  mind  something  which  pre¬ 
ceded  it.  So  the  word  “that”  occurring  at  the  very  beginning 
in  “That  (Light)  that  shines  above  this  heaven”  (Ch.  III.  xiii.  7) 
becomes  connected  with  Brahman  in  the  previous  text  (Ch. 
III.  xii.  6)  on  account  of  a  common  reference  to  heaven.  When 
Brahman  becomes  known  thus,  the  word  Light  also  comes 
logically  to  refer  to  Brahman  by  implication.  So  Brahman  is  to 
be  understood  here  by  Light. 

«T  Not  (Brahman)  SFC-srfVrsTHTtf  because  a  metre  is  men¬ 
tioned  if  this  be  said,  not  so,  ^-3T'T0T-ft',RT^  for  the 

dedication  of  mind  is  taught  tPTT  in  that  way;  for  tRT  55FR 
similar  instances  are  found. 

25.  If  it  be  objected  that  Brahman  is  not  spoken  of,  because 
the  mention  is  about  a  metre,  we  say,  no,  for  the  dedication  of 
the  mind  is  taught  in  that  'way;  for  similar  instances  are  found 
elsewhere . 

Opponent :  It  was  asserted  that  Brahman  is  not  spoken  of 
even  in  the  earlier  text,  for  the  metre  Gayatrl  is  mentioned 


94  BRAHMA- SUTRA -BHA5YA  [Li. 25 

there  in  “Gayatri  is  indeed  all  these  things  that  there  are”  (Ch. 
III.  xii.  1). 

Vedantin  :  That  objection  has  to  be  met.  How,  again,  can  it 
be  maintained  that  just  because  a  metre  is  mentioned,  Brahman 
is  not  spoken  of  here,  when  Brahman  with  four  feet  is  presented 
in  the  Rk  mantra ,  “That  much  is  His  glory”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  6)? 

Opponent :  That  cannot  be  so.  The  metre  Gayatri  is  intro¬ 
duced  in  the  text,  “Gayatri  is  verily  all  this”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  1), 
and  that  very  Gayatri  is  explained  as  identical  with  all  things, 
earth,  body,  heart,  speech,  and  vital  force.  And  then  with 
regard  to  that  very  Gayatri,  as  explained,  it  is  said,  “That 
Gayatri  that  is  such,  has  four  feet  and  it  is  sixfold.  This  fact  is 
revealed  in  the  Rk  mantra ,  ‘That  much  is  His  glory’  ”  etc. 
Having  thus  been  quoted  about  that  very  Gayatri,  how  can 
this  mantra  suddenly  speak  of  Brahman  with  four  feet?  Even 
the  word  Brahman,  used  there  in  the  text,  “That  which  is  this 
Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  7),  refers  to  the  metre  only,  for  the 
metre  is  under  consideration.  In  the  text,  “He  who  knows  this 
secret  teaching  of  Brahman  (i.e.  Veda)”  (Ch.  Ill  xi.  3),  it  is 
explained  that  the  secret  teaching  of  the  Vedas  is  under 
reference.  Accordingly,  may  it  not  be  argued  that  inasmuch  as 
the  metre  is  spoken  of,  Brahman  is  not  under  discussion? 

Vedantin :  That  is  not  valid,  for  “the  dedication  of  the  mind 
is  taught  in  that  way”.  “The  dedication  of  the  mind” — the 
concentration  of  the  mind  in  Brahman;  “in  that  way” — with 
the  help  of  the  metre  Gayatri,  in  which  Brahman  inheres, — is 
taught  by  this  text  of  the  brahrmana  portion,  “Gayatri  is 
verily  all  this”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  1).  Gayatri  as  a  mere  assemblage 
of  letters  cannot  possibly  be  the  Self  of  everything.  Therefore 
Brahman,  which  is  the  cause  of  the  universe  and  inheres  in  Its 
effect,  the  Gayatri,  is  spoken  of  here  as  “all  this”,  just  as  it  is 
done  in,  “All  this  is  verily  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1).  And 
under  the  aphorism,  “It  has  non-difference  from  that  Brahman, 
since  terms  like  origin  etc.  are  met  with”  (II.  i.  14),  we  shall 
point  out  that  the  effect  is  non-different  from  its  material 
cause.  Similarly,  meditation  on  Brahman  with  the  help  of 
natural  mediums  is  met  with  elsewhere  also,  as  in,  “The  fol¬ 
lowers  of  the  Rg-Veda  meditate  on  this  very  supreme  Self  as 


I.  i.  25] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHA§YA 


95 


inhering  in  the  hymn  called  the  great  Uktha;  on  this  the 
followers  of  the  Yajur-Veda  meditate  as  inhering  in  fire;  and  on 
this  the  followers  of  the  Sama-Veda  meditate  as  inhering  in  the 
sacrifice  called  Mahavrata”  (Ai.  A.  III.  ii.  3.12).  Hence,  even 
though  a  metre  he  mentioned  (by  the  word  Gayatrl)  in  the 
earlier  text,  still  Brahman  with  four  feet  is  spoken  of  there. 
And  that  very  Brahman  is  alluded  to  in  the  text  about  Light, 
this  being  done  with  a  view  to  enjoining  a  fresh  meditation. 

Others  say  that  Brahman  is  directly  referred  to  by  the  word 
Gayatrl  through  a  similarity  of  numbers.  Gayatrl  is  possessed 
of  four  feet,  each  consisting  of  six  letters.  So  also  Brahman 
has  four  feet.11’7  Similarly  it  is  found  elsewhere  that  words 
denoting  metres  are  used  to  signify  something  else  through  a 
similarity  of  number.  This  can  be  illustrated  thus:  The  start  is 
made  with  the  statement,  “These  (air,  fire,  etc.)  that  are  five 
in  one  context  (viz  divine)  and  these  (vital  force,  speech,  etc.) 
that  are  five  in  another  context  (viz  bodily)  combine  to  form 
ten  and  thus  become  that  (dice  called)  Krta ”,  and  then  it  is 
said,  “And  this  is  the  same  as  Virat  (the  metre)  which  is  the 
eater  of  food”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  8). 128  From  this  point  of  view, 
Brahman  Itself  is  spoken  of  (directly)  and  not  the  metre 
(Gayatrl).  From  cither  point  of  view,  the  Brahman  under 
discussion  is  present  in  the  previous  text  as  well. 


137  According .  to  the  previous  explanation,  the  word  Gayatrl  in  the 
earlier  text  means  a  metre  in  the  primary  sense,  and  also  Brahman  by 
a  figure  of  speech  called  Ajahallakfand,  where  something  more  in  addi¬ 
tion  to  the  original  meaning  of  the  word  is  meant.  According  to  the 
present  interpretation,  no  such  figure  of  speech  is  implied.  Gayatrl  does 
not  refer  to  the  metre  at  all,  but  to  Brahman  directly.  The  aphorism, 
accordingly  means:  The  metre  Gayatrl  is  not  meant,  cetorpananigadat — 
because  Brahman  is  spoken  of  by  the  word  Gayatrl  standing  as  a 
medium  for  the  dedication  of  the  mind  to  Brahman,  tatha— on  the 
strength  of  the  similarity  of  both  having  four  feet. 

128  In  playing  with  dice,  when  one  wins  with  the  dice  called  Krta  having 
four  figures,  the  other  figures  of  the  other  dice,  viz  three,  two,  and  one 
of  Tretdy  Dvdpara ,  and  Kali  respectively  enter  into  it;  so  that  the  figure 
of  Krta  is  converted  to  ten.  The  metre  Virat  has  ten  letters  to  a  foot.  So 
Virat  and  Krta  are  the  same.  Also  the  Vedas  declare  that  Virdt  is  food; 
and  Krta  is  the  eater  of  all  figures.  So  Virdt  is  both  eater  and  eaten. 


96 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[I.i.  26 


II  ^  II 


And  :  because  the  representation 

of  all  the  things  etc.  as  a  foot  becomes  possible,  iTcp^  this  must 
be  so. 

26.  And  this  must  be  so,  because  this  makes  possible  the 
representation  of  all  the  things  etc .  as  a  foot. 

This  has  to  be  admitted  to  be  so  for  this  further  reason: 
Brahman  is  the  subject-matter  of  the  earlier  text,  since  all  things 
etc.  are  mentioned  as  a  foot.  Thus  after  mentioning  the  things, 
the  earth,  body,  and  heart,  it  is  said,  “That  Gayatrl  of  this 
description  has  six  aspects  and  four  feet”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  5).  For 
unless  Brahman  is  taken  into  account,  a  mere  metre  cannot 
have  all  the  things  etc.  as  its  foot.  Besides,  without  reference 
to  Brahman,  this  Rk  mantra,  “That  much  is  His  glory”  etc. 
(Ch.  III.  xii.  6),  becomes  incongruous.  Brahman  becomes  the 
subject-matter  of  this  mantra  when  it  is  taken  in  its  literal  sense, 
for  Brahman  alone  can  have  the  omnipresence  spoken  of  in, 
“All  these  things  are  but  one  of  His  feet.  His  three  other  feet, 
which  are  immortal,  are  in  heaven”  (ibid.).  In  the  Puru$a- 
Sukta  also,  this  Rk  mantra  occurs  by  way  of  presenting  Brah¬ 
man.  And  the  Smtti  presents  such  a  form  of  Brahman  in,  “I 
exist  supporting  this  whole  universe  by  a  portion  of  Myself” 
(Gita,  X.  42).  Moreover,  the  reference  (to  Brahman)  made  in 
the  words,  “That  which  is  that  Brahman”129  (Ch.  III.  xii.  7), 
can  be  possible  in  the  primary  sense,  only  if  this  point  of  view 
be  accepted.  Furthermore,  the  use  of  the  phrase,  “The  men 
(i.e.  the  gatekeepers)  of  Brahman”,  with  reference  to  the  five 
openings  of  the  heart,  as  found  in  the  text,  “These  five,  de¬ 
scribed  thus,  are  the  men  of  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiii.  6),  can  be 
justified  only  if  a  relationship  with  Brahman  is  the  meaning 
implied.130  Therefore  it  follows  that  Brahman  is  the  subject- 

129  This  sentence,  occurring  just  after,  “That  much  is  His  glory”,  shows 
that  the  mantra  speaks  of  Brahman. 

130  At  the  openings  of  the  heart  are  posted  the  five  vital  forces  as 
gatekeepers  of  Brahman  to  whom  this  city  of  the  body  belongs.  Brahman, 
called  Gayatrl,  has  to  be  meditated  on  in  the  heart  in  this  way. 


I.  i.  27]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  97 

matter  of  the  earlier  text;  and  hence  the  conclusion  is  this:  That 
very  Brahman,  called  up  to  the  mind  by  Its  relationship  with 
heaven,  is  referred  to  in  the  text  about  Light. 

n  ^9 11 

On  account  of  the  difference  in  instruction  «T  not 
so,  if  this  be  the  contention,  then  ^  not  so  arfaffaTq; 

because  of  absence  of  contradiction  arfa  in  either  case. 

27.  If  it  be  argued  that  Brahman  (of  the  earlier  text)  is  not 
referred  to  here  on  account  of  the  difference  in  the  instruction , 
we  say :  No,  because  there  is  no  contradiction  in  either  case . 

And  the  criticism  was  advanced  that  in  the  earlier  text,  viz 
“His  three  feet  which  are  immortal  are  in  heaven”  (Ch.  III. 
xii.  6),  the  word  heaven,  used  in  the  locative  case,  indicates  a 
habitation,  whereas  in  the  text  here,  “That  (Light)  which 
shines  above  this  heaven”,  the  word  used  in  the  ablative  case 
(“above  heaven”),  indicates  a  limitation.  Hence  owing  to  the 
difference  in  the  (form  of  the)  instruction,  the  Brahman  of  the 
previous  text  is  not  called  to  mind  here.  That  criticism  has  to 
be  met. 

To  this  we  ( Ved&ntins )  say:  That  is  no  valid  objection.  For 
there  is  no  contradiction  in  either  case.  In  both  the  places, 
irrespective  of  whether  the  instruction  is  through  an  ending  in 
the  locative  case  or  the  ablative  case  (after  heaven),  the  identi¬ 
fication  suffers  nothing.  As  in  common  usage  we  find  that  a 
hawk  associated  witli  the  top  of  a  tree,  is  referred  to  either  as, 
“The  hawk  on  the  tree  top”  or  “The  hawk  above  the  top  of 
the  tree”,  similarly  Brahman,  though  existing  in  heaven,  is 
taught  as  existing  above  it.  Others  say:  Just  as  a  hawk,  not  in 
actual  contact  with  the  top  of  a  tree  (but  hovering  over  it),  is 
referred  to  either  as  “The  hawk  on  the  tree  top”  or  “The  hawk 
above  the  top  of  the  tree”,  similarly  Brahman,  though  above 
heaven,  is  taught  as  existing  in  heaven.  So  it  can  be  well  recog¬ 
nized  that  the  Brahman,  mentioned  in  the  earlier  text,  is  alluded 
to  here  (in  the  latter  text).  Hence  it  is  proved  that  the  supreme 
Brahman  Itself  is  referred  to  by  Light. 

7 


98 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  11:  Pratardana 


[I.  i.  28 


5TP*T:  Prana  is  Brahman  rPTT  ^iHT^owing  to  such  comprehen¬ 
sion. 

28.  Prana  is  Brahman ,  because  it  is  comprehended  thus. 

Doubt :  In  the  Kau$ItakI  Upani§ad  occurs  the  story  of  Indra 
and  Pratardana,  which  starts  with,  “The  well-known  Pratar¬ 
dana,  son  of  Divodasa,  went  to  Indra’s  beloved  palace  through 
war  and  valour.”  There  we  read,  “I  (i.e.  Indra)  am  Prana, 
identified  with  Consciousness.  You  meditate  on  me,  who  am 
of  such  stature,  as  life  and  immortality”  (III.  2).  Similarly, 
there  occurs  this  text  at  a  later  stage,  “Now  then,  it  is  Prana 
Itself,  identified  with  Consciousness,  that  takes  hold  of  the  body 
and  raises  (i.e.  animates)  it  up”  (III.  3),  as  well  as,  “One 
should  not  inquire  about  speech,  one  should  know  the  speaker” 
(III.  8),  and  so  on.  At  the  end  again  it  is  said,  “That  one  is 
surely  this  Prdpa,  identified  with  Consciousness,  which  is  bliss, 
ageless,  and  deathless”  (III.  8),  and  so  on.  With  regard  to  this, 
the  doubt  arises:  Is  the  mere  vital  force  signified  here  by  the 
word  Prana ,  or  is  it  some  divine  soul,  or  an  individual  being, 
or  the  supreme  Brahman? 

Objection  :  Was  it  not  shown  under  the  aphorism,  uPrana  is 
Brahman  for  that  very  reason”  (I.  i.  23),  that  the  word  Prctya 
is  used  in  the  sense  of  Brahman?  Here  also  the  characteristics 
of  Brahman  are  in  evidence,  viz  “Bliss,  ageless,  deathless”  etc. 
How  can  there  be  any  possibility  of  doubt  here? 

Doubter :  We  say  that  the  doubt  arises  from  noticing  the 
characteristics  of  many.  Not  that  the  indicatory  marks  of 
Brahman  alone  are  present  here;  there  are  marks  indicating 
others  also.  Indra’s  words,  “Know  me  alone”,  are  indicative  of  a 
divine  soul.  “Taking  hold  of  this  body,  it  raises  it  up”  points  to 
Prana  (i.e.  vital  force).  “One  should  not  inquire  about  speech, 
one  should  know  the  speaker”  etc.  presents  the  individual  being. 
Hence  the  doubt  is  justifiable. 


I.  i.  28]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  99 

Opponent :  In  that  passage,  the  well-known  vital  force  is 
referred  to  by  Prana. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  case,  it  is  said:  The  word  Prana 
is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  Brahman. 

Why? 

Because  it  is  comprehended  thus.  To  explain:  When  the 
text  is  discussed  in  the  context  of  what  precedes  and  what 
succeeds,  the  words  arc  seen  to  lead  to  an  understanding  of 
Brahman.  Turning  to  the  commencement,  we  find  that,  when 
told  by  Indra,  “Ask  for  a  boon”,  Pratardana  thus  spoke  of  the 
highest  objective  that  a  man  may  aspire  to:  “You  yourself 
choose  for  me  that  boon  which  you  think  to  be  the  most  benefi¬ 
cent  for  men”  (III.  1).  When  Prana  is  taught  to  him  as  the  most 
beneficent,  how  can  It  be  other  than  the  supreme  Self?  For  a 
man  can  attain  the  most  beneficent  thing  from  nothing  but  the 
knowledge  of  the  supreme  Self,  as  declared  in  the  Vedic  text, 
“Knowing  Him  alone  one  goes  beyond  death;  there  is  no  other 
path  to  go  by”  (Sv.  III.  8),  and  others.  Moreover,  the  text  “The 
world  (viz  liberation)  achieved  by  the  man  who  knows  me  is 
not  certainly  injured  by  any  act — neither  by  theft  nor  the  killing 
of  a  foetus”  (Kau.  III.  1),  becomes  justifiable  only  if  Brahman 
is  accepted,  for  it  is  well  known  from  such  Vedic  texts  as 
the  following  that  all  the  results  of  works  are  eradicated  on 
the  dawn  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman:  “When  He  that  exists 
as  the  superior  and  inferior  Brahman  is  known,  all  the  results 
of  one’s  actions  get  eradicated”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  8).  And  the  fact  of 
Prana  being  one  with  Consciousness  becomes  proper  only  if 
Brahman  is  the  meaning.  For  the  insentient  vital  force  cannot 
be  one  with  Consciousness.  Similarly  such  words  as,  “Bliss, 
ageless,  deathless”  (III.  8),  occurring  at  the  end,  cannot  fully 
apply  to  anything  but  Brahman.  There  are  also  the  texts,  “He 
does  not  become  greater  by  virtuous  deeds,  nor  any  the  less 
by  vicious  deeds.  It  is  He  who  makes  one  do  good  deeds  whom 
He  would  raise  above  these  worlds,  and  H$  again  makes  one 
do  evil  deeds  whom  He  would  cast  below  these  worlds”,  “This 
One  is  the  ruler  over  the  worlds,  this  One  is  the  protector  of 
the  worlds,  this  One  is  the  lord  of  the  worlds”  (Kau.  III.  8), 
which  all  can  be  understood  only  if  the  supreme  Brahman  is 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


100 


[I.i.  28 


resorted  to,  and  not  the  chief  vital  force.  Therefore  Pr&pa  is 
Brahman. 


II  RS.  II 


«T  Not  so  ancW-'dM&li^  the  teaching  being  about  own  self 
of  the  teacher  if  this  be  the  objection,  (then  not 

so)  for  «|Rh^  here  occurs  an  abundance  of 

reference  to  the  inmost  Self. 


29.  If  it  be  argued  that  Prana  is  not  Brahman ,  since  the 
instruction  is  about  the  speaker's  own  selfy  (then  we  say ,  no)9 
for  here  is  an  abundance  of  reference  to  the  imnost  Self . 

Opponent :  The  assertion  that  Prana  is  Brahman  is  being 
refuted.  The  supreme  Brahman  is  not  the  meaning  of  the  word 
Prana. 

Why? 

Because  the  instruction  is  about  the  speaker  himself.  For 
some  embodied  deity,  called  Indra,  is  the  teacher,  who  speaks 
of  himself  to  Pratardana  in  the  first  person  in  the  introductory 
sentence,  “Know  me  alone”  (Kau.  III.  1)  and  in  the  sentence, 
“I  am  Prma ,  identified  with  Consciousness”  (Kau.  III.  2).  How 
can  this  Praria,  taught  as  the  speaker  himself,  be  Brahman?  For 
Brahman  cannot  be  a  speaker,  as  it  is  denied  in  the  Vedic  texts, 
“without  the  vocal  organ  or  mind”  (Bf.  III.  viii.  8),  etc.  Simi¬ 
larly  in  such  sentences  as,  “I  killed  (ViSvarupa)  the  three¬ 
headed  son  of  Tva&a;  I  threw  to  the  wild  dogs  the  hermits 
averse  to  the  Vedas”  (Kau.  III.  1),  Indra  praises  himself  through 
qualities  that  fit  in  with  a  body,  but  not  with  Brahman.  And  it 
is  logical  that  Indra  should  be  one  with  Prana  by  virtue  of  his 
possession  of  strength;  for  we  come  across  such  a  text  as,  “The 
vital  force  is  strength”  (Bj*.  V.  xiv.  4).  It  is  also  well  known 
that  Indra  is  the  presiding  deity  of  strength,  for  even  ordinary 
people  assert,  “Whatever  vigorous  effort  there  may  be,  it  is 
the  work  of  Indra”.  Oneness  with  Consciousness  too  is  possible 
for  a  divine  being  by  virtue  of  his  unobstructed  knowledge; 
for  they  say,  “The  deities  have  unobstructed  knowledge”.  Once 


Li.  29]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  101 

it  is  thus  established  that  the  teaching  is  about  some  divine 
being,  such  facts  as  the  instruction  about  the  most  beneficent 
thing  etc.  have  to  be  interpreted  in  the  best  possible  way  as 
referring  to  that  being. 

Vedantin :  Thus  on  the  strength  of  the  fact  that  Indra,  the 
speaker,  talks  of  himself,  it  is  first  denied  that  Prctfia  can  be 
Brahman;  then  the  refutation  of  that  is  stated  in,  “for  here  is 
an  abundance  of  reference  to  the  inmost  Self”.  “Here”,  in  this 
chapter,  we  find  “an  abundance  of  reference  to  the  inmost  Self”. 
The  text,  “Life  lasts  so  long  as  Prana  lives  in  this  body”  (Kau. 
III.  2),  shows  that  it  is  Prana  alone,  one  with  Consciousness 
and  existing  as  the  indwelling  Self,  and  not  any  external  deity 
(coming  to  exist  after  It),  that  has  independence  in  the  matter 
of  granting  life  and  ending  it.  Similarly  the  text,  “When  Pritya 
exists,  the  senses  and  organs  exist”  (ibid.),  shows  that  Prana , 
as  the  indwelling  Self,  is  the  support  of  the  senses  and  organs. 
So  also  the  text,  “It  is  Praiia,  identified  with  Consciousness, 
that  takes  hold  of  the  body  and  lifts  it  up”  (Kau.  III.  3),  (shows 
that  Praiia,  as  the  indwelling  Self,  supports  the  body).  And 
starting  with,  “One  should  not  inquire  about  speech,  but  should 
know  the  speaker  (i.c.  Prana)”  (Kau.  III.  8),  it  is  said,  “To 
illustrate  the  point:  As  the  rim  of  a  wheel  is  fixed  on  the  spokes 
of  a  chariot  and  the  spokes  are  fixed  on  the  nave,  so  are  these 
(five)  elements  and  (five)  sense-objects  fixed  on  the  (five) 
sense-perceptions  and  (five)  senses,  and  these  latter  are  fixed 
on  Prana ”  (ibid.);  “That  very  Prana ,  as  described,  is  one  with 
Consciousness”  (Kau.  III.  8);  “Bliss,  ageless,  deathless”  (Kau. 
III.  8).  All  these  texts  present  the  inmost  Self  as  their  only 
object  which  remains  unaffected  by  the  contacts  between  sense- 
objects  and  senses.  And  the  conclusion  with  the  words,  “One 
should  know,  ‘He  is  my  Self’  ”,  becomes  justifiable  if  the  inmost 
Self  is  accepted,  but  not  if  any  external  being  (e.g.  a  god  born 
later  on)  is  taken  up.  In  support  of  this,  there  occurs  a  sentence 
in  another  Upanijad,  “This  Self,  the  perceiver  of  everything,  is 
Brahman”  (Bj*.  II.  v.  19).  Therefore,  from  the  abundance  of 
reference  to  the  inmost  Self,  it  follows  that  this  Prana  is 
Brahman. 

Why  then  does  the  speaker  teach  about  himself? 


102  BRAHMA  - SCTRA  - BHA$YA  [Li.  30 

II  \o  || 

5  But  ^T^T:  the  instruction  proceeds  from  a  seer’s 

vision  agreeing  with  scriptures  as  in  the  case  of 

Vamadeva. 

30.  But  the  instruction  proceeds  from  a  seefs  vision  agreeing 
with  scriptures ,  as  in  the  case  of  Vamadeva. 

Indra,  a  divine  being,  who  had  through  a  seer’s  (natural) 
vision,  agreeing  with  the  scriptures,  realized  his  own  Self  as 
the  supreme  Self  thus,  “I  am  surely  the  supreme  Brahman”, 
imparted  the  instruction,  “Know  me  alone”  (Kau.  III.  1).  This 
is  just  like  what  is  read  in,  “The  sage  Vamadeva,  while  realizing 
this  (Self)  as, That  (Brahman),  knew,  ‘I  was  Manu  and  the 
sun’”  (Bj*.  I.  iv.  10);  for  the  Upani$ad  declares,  “And  whoever 
among  the  gods  knew  this  became  That”  (ibid.).  The  criticism 
also  has  to  be  met  that  after  declaring,  “Know  me  alone”,  Indra 
praises  himself  with  such  characteristics,  suggestive  of  embodied¬ 
ness,  as  the  killing  of  the  son  of  Tvafta.  In  answer  it  is  said:  It 
is  not  by  way  of  eulogizing  Indra,  who  is  to  be  known,  that 
such  facts  as  the  killing  of  the  son  of  Tva&a  and  so  on  are 
presented,  conveying  thereby  this  idea,  “Since  I  am  a  per- 
forfner  of  such  deeds,  therefore  you  worship  me”.  Why  are 
they  spoken  of  then?  It  is  for  the  sake  of  eulogizing  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman.  This  being  the  end  in  view,  the  daring 
acts  like  the  killing  of  the  son  of  Tva&a  are  first  introduced 
and  then  these  are  connected  with  the  praise  of  knowledge 
thus:  “For  me,  while  engaged  in  such  (cruel)  deeds,  not  a 
hair  was  lost.  Of  one  who  knows  me,  no  acquired  merit  is 
adversely  affected  by  any  act  whatsoever”  (Kau.  III.  1).  The 
idea  expressed  is  this:  As  I  have  become  identified  with  Brahman, 
and  hence  I  do  not  lose  so  much  as  a  hair,  even  though 
engaged  in  such  cruel  deeds,  therefore  for  anyone  else,  too, 
who  knows  me,  there  can  be  no  injury  to  his  acquired  merit 
by  any  act  whatsoever.  The  real  entity  to  be  known,  however, 
is  Brahman  which  will  be  presented  later  in,  “I  am  Fraya,  one 
with  Consciousness”  (Kau.  III.  2).  Therefore  this  is  a  statement 
about  Brahman. 


I.  i.  31]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  103 


<ratopni  \\  ii 


#*-qwu«l-f55»n^  On  account  of  the  indicatory  marks  of 
the  individual  soul  and  chief  Praria  *T  not  so,  if  such  be 

the  objection,  (then)  •T  not  so  because  this  will 

lead  to  a  threefold  meditation;  because  of  accept¬ 
ance;  here  because  of  the  presence  of  those  char¬ 

acteristics  (of  Brahman). 


31.  If  it  be  argued  that  Brahman  is  not  spoken  of  here  on 
account  of  the  indications  of  the  individual  soul  and  the  chief 
vital  force ,  then  that  cannot  be  so,  since  this  will  lead  to  a 
threefold  meditation .  (Besides,  Prana)  is  accepted  (elsewhere) 
as  meaning  Brahman  (because  of  the  presence  of  Brahman- s 
characteristics ),  (and  these  are)  in  evidence  here. 


Opponent  :  Although  it  follows  from  the  frequency  of 
reference  to  the  inmost  Self  that  the  instruction  is  not  about 
any  (subsequently  born)  external  divine  being,  still  this  text 
does  not  relate  to  Brahman. 

Why? 

Because  there  arc  the  characteristic  marks  of  the  individual 
soul  and  the  chief  Prdna.  As  for  the  characteristic  mark  of  the 
individual  soul,  it  is  clearly  in  evidence  in  this  sentence:  “One 
should  not  inquire  about  speech,  but  should  know  the  speaker” 
(Kau.  II.  8),  and  so  on.  For  the  individual  soul,  engaged  in  the 
use  of  the  vocal  and  other  organs  and  presiding  over  the 
assemblage  of  body  and  senses,  is  spoken  of  here  as  an  entity 
to  be  known.  So  also  there  is  the  indication  of  the  chief  vital 
force:  “Now,  then,  it  is  PrUna ,  one  with  Consciousness,  that 
takes  hold  of  the  body  and  lifts  it  up”  (Kau.  III.  3);  and  the 
keeping  up  of  the  body  together  is  the  function  of  the  vital 
force.  For  in  the  anecdote  of  Prdna  it  is  heard  about  the  other 
pranas,  viz  the  organs  of  speech  etc.:  “To  them  the  chief 
Prana  said,  4I)o  not  be  deluded;  for  it  is  I  who  hold  this  body 
together  by  dividing  myself  in  five  ways’”  (Pr.  II.  3).  The 
meaning  (of  the  Kau$Ttald  text  quoted  above),  according  to 
those  who  read  “ imath  tarirath  parigfhya ”,  ( vMaih  “this”  being 


104  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.i.  31 

used  in  the  masculine  in  place  of  idam  in  the  neuter),  the 
explanation  will  be  this:  “Taking  hold  of  this  individual  soul  or 
this  assemblage  of  body  and  senses,  it  lifts  up  the  body.”  Identity 
with  Consciousness  too  is  justifiable  in  the  case  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  on  the  ground  of  its  intelligence.  And  this  is  justifiable 
in  the  case  of  the  chief  vital  force  also,  since  it  supports  the 
other  organs  (called  pranas)  which  are  the  instruments  of 
perception.  Even  if  both  the  individual  soul  and  the  vital  force 
be  meant,  still  it  is  reasonable  to  mention  them  as  one  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  coexistence  of  the  conscious  soul  and 
Prthia;  and  yet  they  can  be  mentioned  separately  from  their 
own  individual  standpoints,  as  in,  “That  which  is  Prana  is 
intelligence,  and  that  which  is  intelligence  is  Praya”  (Kau.  Ill 
3),  “These  two  reside  together  in  the  body,  and  they  leave 
this  body  together”  (Kau.  III.  3).  If  Brahman  be  accepted  as  the 
meaning  (of  Prana ),  then  which  one  will  differ  from  the  other? 
Therefore  let  either  the  individual  soul  or  Prana ,  or  even  both 
be  the  meaning,  but  not  Brahman. 

Veddntin :  Not  so,  for  that  involves  a  threefold  meditation. 
On  that  supposition  we  shall  be  faced  with  three  kinds  of  medi¬ 
tation — meditation  on  the  individual  soul,  meditation  on  the 
chief  Prana ,  and  meditation  on  Brahman.  But  such  a  meaning 
is  inadmissible  for  a  single  sentence.  For  from  a  consideration 
of  the  beginning  and  complementary  portion  of  the  passage,  a 
unity  of  idea  becomes  obvious.  After  starting  with,  “Know  me 
alone”  (Kau.  III.  1),  and  declaring,  “I  am  Prana ,  one  with 
Consciousness.  Worship  me  as  life  and  immortality”  (Kau.  III. 
2),  it  is  said  at  the  end,  “That  very  entity  that  is  Prana  is  one 
with  Consciousness”  (Kau.  III.  8),  “Bliss,  ageless,  deathless” 
(III.  8),  where  we  find  that  the  start  and  the  finish  are  of  the 
same  pattern.  That  being  so,  it  is  reasonable  to  understand  a 
unity  of  purport.  Besides,  it  is  not  possible  to  apply  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  Brahman  to  anything  else,  for  the  ten  forms  of 
elements  and  the  ten  forms  of  intelligence  (i.e.  five  elements  and 
their  qualities,  and  five  senses  and  five  forms  of  sensation) 
cannot  be  merged  in  anything  but  Brahman.  “Moreover,  it  is 
admitted”.  Since  from  the  presence  of  the  characteristics  of 
Brahman,  the  word  Prd?ia  is  admitted  elsewhere  to  mean 


I.  i.  31  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  105 

Brahman  (B.S.  I.  i.  23),  and  since  here  also  is  in  evidence  the 
presence  of  such  characteristics  as  being  the  most  beneficent 
and  so  on,  it  is  understood  that  this  is  an  instruction  about 
Brahman. 

And  it  was  argued  that  the  text,  “Taking  hold  of  this  body, 
lifts  it  up”  (Kau.  III.  3),  is  an  indication  of  the  chief  vital  force. 
But  that  is  wrong.  For  even  the  functions  of  the  vital  force 
are  dependent  on  Brahman,  and  can  thus  be  ascribed  (figura¬ 
tively)  to  the  supreme  Self,  as  is  done  in  the  Upani$adic  text, 
“No  mortal  being  lives  through  exhaling  and  inhaling,  but 
through  some  other  entity  on  which  these  two  rest”  (Ka.  II. 
v.  5).  Even  the  interpretation  of  the  text,  “One  should  not 
inquire  about  speech,  but  should  know  the  speaker”  (Kau.  III. 
8),  as  presenting  a  sign  of  the  individual  soul  (that  is  shown 
by  the  opponent)  cannot  rule  out  the  acceptance  of  Brahman. 
For  what  is  known  as  the  individual  soul  is  not  entirely  different 
from  Brahman;  for  the  texts,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii- 
xvi),  “I  am  Brahman”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  ID),  and  so  on  demolish  this 
view.  Though  the  individual  soul  is  Brahman  in  reality,  it  is 
called  an  agent  or  an  experiencer  on  account  of  the  distinctions 
created  by  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the  intellect.  In  order  to 
make  one  turn  towards  the  inmost  Self,  it  involves  no  contradic¬ 
tion  to  say,  “One  should  not  inquire  about  speech,  but  should 
know  the  speaker”  (Kau.  III.  8),  which  is  meant  to  divest  the 
individual  soul  of  the  distinctions  created  by  conditioning 
factors  and  to  show  it  as  Brahman,  which  is  its  true  nature. 
And  another  Upani$adic  text,  “That  which  is  not  uttered  by 
speech,  that  by  which  speech  is  uttered — know  that  to  be 
Brahman,  and  not  this  thing  that  they  worship  objectively” 
(Ke.  I.  5),  shows  that  the  soul,  engaged  in  such  activities  as 
speaking,  is  but  Brahman. 

Another  objection  was  that  the  perception  of  difference 
between  Prana  and  the  Self  identified  with  Consciousness,  as 
stated  in,  “for  they  both  reside  in  this  body  together  and  they 
leave  the  body  together”  (Kau.  III.  4),  cannot  be  maintained 
by  one  who  sticks  to  Brahman.  That  is  not  a  valid  objection. 
For  it  is  possible  to  indicate  a  difference  between  the  intellect 
and  Prana ,  as  constituting  the  two  limiting  adjuncts  of  the 


106  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  i.  3 1 

indwelling  Self  and  forming  the  bases  of  the  power  of  knowing 
and  acting.  But  the  indwelling  Self,  that  is  conditioned  by  the 
two,  has  no  difference  in  Itself.  Hence  the  identification  stated 
in  “ Prana  is  one  with  Consciousness”  involves  no  contradiction. 

Or  the  portion  of  the  aphorism,  “Nopasatraividhyat  d'sritatvat 
iha  tadyogdt ”,  has  this  other  meaning  (according  to  Vrttikara): 
There  is  no  contradiction  even  if  we  meet  with  the  character¬ 
istics  of  the  individual  soul  and  the  chief  vital  force  in  this 
context  dealing  with  Brahman. 

Why? 

For  there  is  a  threefold  meditation.  Three  kinds  of  meditation 
on  Brahman  are  meant  here — with  the  help  of  the  qualities  of 
Prana ,  intelligence,  and  Brahman  Itself.  Of  these  the  qualities 
of  Prana  are  mentioned  in:  “Meditate  as  life  and  immortality; 
life  is  Prana ”  (Kau.  III.  2);  “Taking  hold  of  this  body,  lifts  it 
up”  (Kau.  III.  3);  and  therefore  “One  should  meditate  on  it  as 
Uktha”181  (Kau.  III.  3).  The  qualities  of  the  intellect  (i.e.  soul) 
are  stated  thus:  Starting  with,  “Now  we  shall  explain  how  all 
these  things  become  unified  in  that  intellect”132  (Kau.  III.  4), 
it  is  stated,  “The  vocal  organ  itself  fills  up  one  half  of  its  (i.e. 
intellect’s)  body,  names,  expressed  (through  eye  etc.)  as  the 
objects  perceived,  become  its  other  half”133  (Kau.  III.  5), 
“Riding  on  the  vocal  organ  through  the  intellect,  it  (i.e.  the 
conscious  soul)  reaches  all  the  names”134  (ibid.).  Here  the 
qualities  of  the  intellect  are  indicated.  And  the  qualities  of 
Brahman  are  shown  in,  “These  ten  elements  and  their  enjoy¬ 
able  qualities  are  dependent  on  the  ten  senses  and  sense-percep¬ 
tions;  and  the  senses  and  sense-perceptions  are  dependent  on 

131  That  which  lifts  up  (utthapay  ati)  the  body  is  Uktha,  i.e.  Prana. 

132  By  the  word  “Prajfia”  is  meant  here  the  intellect  bearing  on  it  the 
reflection  of  the  Self.  All  things  perceived  through  that  intellect  become 
unified  in  the  Self  which  is  the  basis  of  the  intellect. 

133  The  Self’s  reflection  on  intellect,  called  the  soul,  is  the  real  subject 
perceiving  the  universe  of  names.  And  this  constitutes  half  of  its  body. 
It  is  also  the  subject  perceiving  the  forms  constituting  the  universe  of 
forms.  This  is  the  other  half  of  its  body.  The  intellect,  with  the  reflection 
of  the  Self  on  it,  acts  in  relation  to  the  universe  of  names  through  the 
vocal  organ. 

13t  Similarly  it  becomes  a  seer  etc. 


I.  i.  31]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  107 

the  elements  and  their  qualities.  Had  not  the  elements  and 
qualities  been  there,  the  senses  and  sensations  would  not  have 
been  there;  and  had  not  the  senses  and  sensations  been  there, 
the  elements  and  their  qualities  would  not  have  been  there. 
From  neither  of  them  is  any  rupa,  appearance,  possible;  nor  are 
they  different.  To  illustrate  this  point:  As  the  rim  of  a  chariot 
wheel  is  fixed  on  the  spokes  and  the  spokes  are  fixed  on  the 
nave,  so  are  these  elements  and  their  enjoyable  qualities  fixed 
on  the  senses  and  sensations,  and  the  senses  and  sensations  are 
fixed  on  the  elements  and  their  enjoyable  qualities.  This  Prana , 
that  is  such,  is  surely  one  with  Consciousness”  (Kau.  III.  8). 
Accordingly,  this  is  a  single  meditation  on  Brahman,  spoken  of 
as  threefold  by  basing  it  on  Brahman’s  own  qualities  and  the 
qualities  of  Its  two  conditioning  factors.  Elsewhere  also  medi¬ 
tation  on  Brahman  is  resorted  to,  as  for  instance,  with  the  help 
of  such  identification  with  the  qualities  of  the  conditioning 
factors  as  “having  identity  with  the  mind”,  as  “having  Praria  as 
the  body”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2),  and  so  on.  That  applies  here  also, 
for  the  unity  of  purport  is  understood  from  the  beginning  and 
the  end  of  the  text  and  because  we  get  here  the  marks  indicative 
of  Prana ,  the  intellect,  and  Brahman.135  Hence  it  is  proved  that 
this  text  propounds  Brahman. 


““  Ratnaprabha  rejects  this  view  and  states  that  this  is  the  Vrttikara’s 
interpretation,  Sankara’s  own  having  been  given  earlier. 


Section  II 


Introduction :  In  the  first  section,  it  was  stated  under  the 
aphorism,  “That  from  which  are  derived  the  birth  etc.  of  this”, 
that  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  birth  of  the  whole  universe 
starting  with  space  (B.  S.  I.  i.  2).  Thereby  it  was  stated  ipso 
facto  that  Brahman,  as  the  cause  of  the  universe,  is  possessed  of 
such  characteristics  as  omnipresence,  eternality,  omniscience, 
omnipotence,  identity  with  all,  and  so  on.  And  it  was  shown 
with  the  help  of  reason,  that  certain  words,  familiarly  meaning 
other  things,  are  used  in  the  Upani$ads  in  the  sense  of  Brahman; 
it  was  thereby  ascertained  that  though  the  meanings  of  certain 
sentences,  bearing  clear  indications  of  Brahman,  were  under 
doubt,  yet  they  meant  Brahman.  With  regard  to  some  other 
sentences,  having  indistinct  indication  of  Brahman,  the  doubt 
again  arises  as  to  whether  they  establish  the  supreme  Brahman 
or  some  other  entity.  The  second  and  third  sections  are  started 
for  ascertaining  this: 

Topic  1:  The  Entity  Known  Everywhere 

srfwta&iki  ii  ? 

Everywhere  (in  all  the  Upani$ads)  the  well- 

known  entity  having  been  taught. 

1.  (Brahman  is  the  object  to  be  meditated  on),  since  that 
which  is  well  known  everywhere  is  taught  (here  in  this 
Chandogya  Upanifad — III.  xh.  1-2). 

Doubt :  This  is  stated  in  the  Upani$ad:  “All  this  is  but 
Brahman,  because  it  originates  from  that  (Brahman),  merges  in 
that,  and  is  sustained  by  that.  One  should  meditate  by  becoming 
calm.  Now  then,  a  man  is  a  product  of  his  resolves.  After 
departing  from  this  world,  a  man  becomes  just  as  he  wills  (i.e. 
according  to  what  he  meditates  on)  here.  He  should  have 
resolution.  He  who  is  identified  with  the  mind,  whose  body  is 


I.ii.l]  IIKAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  109 

Prana  (subtle  body),  and  whose  nature  consists  of  light  (i.e. 
intelligence) ”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1-2).  With  regard  to  this  the  doubt 
arises:  Is  the  unbodied  soul,  possessed  of  such  characteristics 
as  identification  with  the  mind,  set  forth  here  for  meditation, 
or  is  it  the  supreme  Brahman?  What  would  be  the  conclusion 
arrived  at? 

Opponent :  It  must  be  the  embodied  soul. 

Why? 

Because  in  its  case,  the  relation  with  the  mind  etc.  is  a  well- 
known  fact,  whereas  it  is  not  so  in  the  case  of  the  supreme 
Brahman,  as  stated  in,  “Because  He  is  pure  and  without  vital 
force  and  mind”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  and  other  texts. 

Objection  :  Such  statements  as  “bigger  than  the  earth”  (ibid, 
xiv.  1),  Brahman  is  presented  by  name.  So  how  can  the  doubt 
arise  that  the  entity  to  be  meditated  on  here  is  the  embodied 
soul? 

Opponent :  Thai  raises  no  difficulty.  This  sentence  is  not  an 
injunction  about  Brahman. 

About  what  is  it  then? 

It  is  meant  for  enjoining  calmness,  as  is  evident  from  the 
statement,  “All  this  is  but  Brahman,  because  it  originates  from 
that,  merges  in  t  hat,  and  is  sustained  by  that.  One  should  medi¬ 
tate  by  becoming  calm”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1-2).  The  idea  implied 
is  this:  Since  all  this  creation  is  but  Brahman,  because  it  origi¬ 
nates  there,  merges  there,  and  subsists  there,  and  because  attach¬ 
ment  etc.  are  not  possible  when  all  things  are  the  same,  therefore 
one  should  meditate  by  becoming  calm.  And  if  this  sentence  is 
meant  to  enjoin  calmness,  it  cannot  at  the  same  time  be  con¬ 
strued  to  enjoin  a  meditation  on  Brahman.1  The  meditation 
itself  is  enjoined  in  the  sentence,  “He  should  have  a  kratu'\ 
where  kratu  means  resolution,  that  is  to  say,  meditation.  And 
for  stating  an  object  of  that  meditation,  the  text  says,  “identified 
with  the  mitul  and  having  the  vital  force  as  his  body”  (ibid.). 
Now,  this  is  a  sign  of  the  individual  soul.  Therefore  we  say 
that  this  meditation  relates  to  the  individual  soul.  And  the 
text,  “performer  of  all  actions,  possessor  of  all  desires”  etc.  (Ch. 


1For  that  would  undermine  the  unity  of  purport  of  a  sentence. 


110 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.ii.1 


III.  xiv.  2),  that  we  come  across,  becomes  applicable  to  the 
individual  being  from  the  standpoint  of  its  progressive  realiza¬ 
tion  (of  these  in  different  births).  Again,  for  the  individual 
soul,  of  the  size  of  the  tip  of  a  goading  stick  (Sv.  V.  8),  and 
not  for  the  infinite  Brahman,  can  be  thought  of  such  residence 
in  the  heart  and  minuteness,  as  stated  in,  “Within  the  heart  is 
this  Self  of  mine  which  is  smaller  than  a  grain  of  paddy  or 
barley”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  3). 

Objection  :  Such  statements  as  “bigger  than  the  earth”  (ibid.) 
cannot  be  thought  of  in  connection  with  the  limited  soul. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  we  say:  Both  minuteness  and  vastness 
cannot  be  applied  to  the  same  entity,  for  that  is  contradictory. 
And  if  one  of  the  two  has  to  be  accepted,  it  is  more  reasonable 
to  take  up  minuteness,  mentioned  earlier.  But  vastness  can  be 
mentioned  from  the  standpoint  of  the  soul’s  becoming  Brahman. 
The  definite  meaning  being  the  individual  soul,  the  mention  of 
Brahman  at  the  end  in  the  words,  “This  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv. 
4),  relates  to  the  individual  soul  itself,  for  that  text  is  meant 
as  a  reference  to  a  subject  already  being  discussed.  Therefore 
the  individual  being  is  to  be  meditated  on  as  possessed  of  the 
qualities  of  being  identified  with  the  mind  etc. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  The  supreme 
Brahman  Itself  is  to  be  meditated  on  as  possessed  of  the  charac¬ 
teristics  of  identification  with  the  mind  etc. 

Why? 

Because  it  is  but  reasonable  that  the  source  of  the  universe, 
connoted  by  the  word  Brahman,  well  known  in  all  the  Upani- 
sads,  and  declared  in  the  words,  “All  this  is  but  Brahman”,  in 
the  present  text  at  the  very  start,  should  be  taught  as  possessed 
of  the  characteristics  of  being  identified  with  the  mind,  and  so 
on.  On  this  interpretation  we  avoid  the  fault  of  giving  up  the 
topic  under  discussion  and  turning  to  something  extraneous. 

Opponent .:  Did  we  not  say  that  Brahman  is  presented  at  the 
beginning  for  the  purpose  of  enjoining  calmness,  but  not  for  Its 
own  sake? 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this,  we  say  that,  although 
Brahman  be  presented  in  connection  with  the  injunction  for 
calmness,  still  when  such  qualities  as  identity  with  the  mind 


I.ii.l] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


111 


etc.  are  taught,  Brahman  happens  to  be  nearer  to  them  (than  the 
individual  soul),  whereas  the  individual  soul  is  neither  near  at 
hand2  nor  is  it  presented  through  any  of  its  own  synonyms.3 
Here  lies  the  difference. 


II  ^  II 

^  And  because  the  intended  qualities  fit  in. 

2.  And  this  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  intended  qualities 
are  justifiable  (in  the  case  of  Brahman). 

The  vivakfitdh  are  those  that  are  intended  to  be  expressed. 
Although  the  Vedas  have  no  author,  and  hence  in  the  absence 
of  a  speaker  (i.e.  author)  the  idea  of  intention  is  inadmissible, 
still  the  word  intention  can  be  used  figuratively  in  the  sense  of 
“resulting  in  being  accepted”.4  In  common  experience  also,  any 
sense  expressed  of  a  word,  that  is  acceptable,  is  said  to  be  its 
intended  meaning,  and  what  is  not  acceptable  is  said  to  be  un¬ 
intended.  Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  Vedas,  the  intended  mean¬ 
ing  is  known  from  the  fact  of  its  being  presented  as  acceptable 
and  the  unintended  meaning  is  that  which  is  unacceptable. 
Acceptability  or  unacceptability,  again,  is  determined  from  what 
is  or  is  not  the  meaning  of  a  Vedic  text.  Therefore  those  intended 
qualities  that  are  enjoined  here  for  being  taken  up  during  the 
meditation,  viz  true  resolve  and  so  forth,  fit  in  with  the  supreme 
Brahman;  for  true  resolve  can  be  thought  of  only  in  the  case 
of  the  supreme  Brahman,  It  being  possessed  of  absolute  power 
in  the  matter  of  creation,  continuance,  and  dissolution.  And  the 
phrases,  “possessing  true  desire  and  true  resolve”,  are  found  in 

2  When  we  split  up  the  compounds,  pranasartrah  and  manomayah  thus 
— This  one  which  has  Prana  as  the  body  and  this  one  which  has  mind 
as  Its  adjunct — the  pronoun  “This  one  which”  readily  brings  Brahman  to 
our  mind,  since  that  pronoun  refers  to  something  near  at  hand. 

3  Any  indication  of  the  individual  found  here  is  ruled  out,  since  an 
entity  subject  to  grief  cannot  be  an  object  of  meditation,  such  an  act 
being  illogical. 

4  The  result  of  intending  a  meaning  is  its  comprehension  as  such.  Thar 
possibility  of  comprehension  being  present  in  the  case  of  the  attributes 
under  discussion,  they  arc  “intended”. 


I.  ii.l] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


111 


etc.  are  taught,  Brahman  happens  to  be  nearer  to  them  (than  the 
individual  soul),  whereas  the  individual  soul  is  neither  near  at 
hand2  nor  is  it  presented  through  any  of  its  own  synonyms.3 
Here  lies  the  difference. 


11  ^  n 

^  And  because  the  intended  qualities  fit  in. 

2.  And  this  follows  from  the  fact  that  the  intended  qualities 
are  justifiable  (in  the  case  of  Brahman). 

The  vivakfitah  are  those  that  are  intended  to  be  expressed. 
Although  the  Vedas  have  no  author,  and  hence  in  the  absence 
of  a  speaker  (i.e.  author)  the  idea  of  intention  is  inadmissible, 
still  the  word  intention  can  be  used  figuratively  in  the  sense  of 
“resulting  in  being  accepted”.4  In  common  experience  also,  any 
sense  expressed  of  a  word,  that  is  acceptable,  is  said  to  be  its 
intended  meaning,  and  what  is  not  acceptable  is  said  to  be  un¬ 
intended.  Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  Vedas,  the  intended  mean¬ 
ing  is  known  from  the  fact  of  its  being  presented  as  acceptable 
and  the  unintended  meaning  is  that  which  is  unacceptable. 
Acceptability  or  unacceptability,  again,  is  determined  from  what 
is  or  is  not  the  meaning  of  a  Vedic  text.  Therefore  those  intended 
qualities  that  are  enjoined  here  for  being  taken  up  during  the 
meditation,  viz  true  resolve  and  so  forth,  fit  in  with  the  supreme 
Brahman;  for  true  resolve  can  be  thought  of  only  in  the  case 
of  the  supreme  Brahman,  It  being  possessed  of  absolute  power 
in  the  matter  of  creation,  continuance,  and  dissolution.  And  the 
phrases,  “possessing  true  desire  and  true  resolve”,  are  found  in 

2  When  we  split  up  the  compounds,  pranasarirah  and  manomayah  thus 
— This  one  which  has  Prana  as  the  body  and  this  one  which  has  mind 
as  Its  adjunct — the  pronoun  “This  one  which”  readily  brings  Brahman  to 
our  mind,  since  that  pronoun  refers  to  something  near  at  hand. 

*Any  indication  of  the  individual  found  here  is  ruled  out,  since  an 
entity  subject  to  grief  cannot  be  an  object  of  meditation,  such  an  act 
being  illogical. 

4  The  result  of  intending  a  meaning  is  its  comprehension  as  such.  That 
possibility  of  comprehension  being  present  in  the  case  of  the  attributes 
under  discussion,  they  are  “intended”. 


I.ii.4] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


113 


3.  And  the  embodied  individual  soul  is  not  surely  meant , 
because  the  qualities  do  not  fit  in  with  it. 

The  preceding  aphorism  spoke  of  the  aptness  of  the  intended 
qualities  in  Brahman.  This  one  speaks  of  their  inapplicability  to 
the  embodied  soul.  The  word  tu  is  used  to  signify  emphasis. 
According  to  the  reasons  adduced,  it  is  Brahman  alone  that  is 
possessed  of  the  qualities  of  being  identified  with  the  mind,  and 
so  on.  The  individual  soul  cannot  have  those  qualities,  the 
reason  being  this:  “Having  true  resolve,  having  space  as  the 
body”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2),  “without  speech,  without  any  attach¬ 
ment”  (ibid.),  “greater  than  the  earth”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  3),  and 
such  other  qualities  do  not  properly  fit  in  with  the  individual 
being.  The  word  sarira  means  existing  in  the  body. 

Opponent :  Does  not  God  also  exist  in  the  body? 

Vedantin True,  He  exists  in  the  body,  but  not  in  the  body 
alone;  for  the  Upani§ad  declares  His  pervasiveness  in,  “Greater 
than  the  earth,  greater  than  the  interspace”  (ibid.),  and  “He 
is  all-pervasive  like  space  and  eternal”.  But  the  individual  being 
exists  in  the  body  alone;  for  it  does  not  exist  anywhere  else 
apart  from  the  body,  which  is  the  seat  for  its  experiences. 


^  sfnMig  In  And  because  there  is  mention  of  the  object 
and  the  subject. 

4.  And  because  there  is  reference  to  the  object  and  subject. 

The  embodied  being  is  not  the  one  possessed  of  such  qualities 
as  being  “identified  with  the  mind”  for  this  further  reason  that 
there  is  an  assertion  of  an  object  and  a  subject  (i.e.  something 
attained  and  somebody  attaining  it)  in  the  sentence,  “Departing 
from  here  I  shall  attain  this  one”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  4).  By  the  term 
“this  one”,  the  Self  to  be  meditated  on,  as  possessed  of  the 
qualities  of  being  identified  with  the  mind,  is  referred  to  as  an 
object  to  be  attained.  Abhisambhavitasmi ,  meaning  “I  shall 
attain”,  refers  to  the  embodied  being,  the  meditator,  as  the 
agent  of  the  attainment.  When  a  more  reasonable  standpoint  is 
possible,  it  is  not  proper  to  refer  to  the  same  entity  as  both  the 
8 


114  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  ri.ii.4 

subject  and  object.  Similarly  the  relationship  between  the  object 
meditated  on  and  the  agent  meditating  is  based  on  difference. 
For  this  reason  also,  the  embodied  being  is  not  the  one  pos¬ 
sessed  of  such  qualities  as  “being  identified  with  the  mind”. 


5.  Owing  to  the  difference  m  the  (case-endmgs  of  the  two) 
words. 

The  one  possessed  of  such  characteristics  as  identity  with  the 
mind  and  so  on  must  be  different  from  the  embodied  being  for 
this  additional  reason  that  a  difference  in  the  case-endings  of 
the  words  occurs  in  a  similar  context5  in  another  Vedic  text: 
“Just  as  a  grain  of  paddy  or  barley  or  sydnmka  (canary)  or  a 
seed  of  iydmdka  is  (very  small),  so  is  the  effulgent  Puru§a  (i.e. 
the  conscious  all-pervasive  Entity)  inside  the  (individual)  soul 
(antaratmm)”  (§.  B.  X.  vi.  3.  2.).  Here  the  word  Puru$a, 
used  in  the  singular  number,  nominative  case,  means  the  Self 
endowed  with  the  qualities  of  being  identified  with  the  mind 
and  so  on;  and  this  word  is  different  from  the  term  antardtman 6 
which  is  used  with  a  seventh  case-ending  and  refers  to  the 
embodied  soul.  Therefore  their  difference  becomes  obvious  (so 
that  the  one  identified  with  the  mind  is  not  the  individual 
soul). 


n  %  n 

6.  (This  follows)  from  the  Smrti  also. 

The  embodied  soul  and  the  supreme  Self  are  shown  differ¬ 
ently  in  the  Sirqti  also:  “The  Lord,  O  Arjuna,  dwells  in  the 
hearts  of  all  beings,  causing  all  beings  by  His  Maya  to  revolve, 
(as  if)  mounted  on  a  machine”  (Gita,  XVIII.  61). 

Here  the  opponent  puts  in:  What  is  this  entity,  called  the 
embodied  soul  different  from  the  supreme  Self,  which  is  denied 

6  Where  the  same  meditation  occurs. 

•Meaning  antardtmani ,  within  the  embodied  soul,  the  dropping  of  the 
seventh  case-ending  being  a  Vedic  licence. 


I.  ii.  7]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  115 

by  the  aphorism,  “The  individual  soul  is  not  certainly  referred 
to,  because  the  qualities  do  not  fit  in  with  it”  (I.  ii.  3)  etc.?  Als 
a  matter  of  fact,  the  Vedic  texts,  as  for  instance,  “There  is  no 
other  witness  but  Him”  (Bf.  III.  vii.  23),  deny  any  Self  other 
than  the  supreme  Self.  So  also  do  the  Sm|ti  texts,  as  for  instance, 
“Me  do  thou  also  know,  O  descendant  of  Bharata,  to  be  the 
knower  of  the  k$etra  (i.e.  body)  in  all  the  kfetras ”  (Gita, 
XIII.  2). 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  say:  It  is  quite  true  that  the  supreme 
Self  Itself,  as  delimited  by  the  conditioning  factors — body, 
senses,  mind,  intellect,  etc. — is  spoken  of  in  a  roundabout  way 
as  the  embodied  soul  by  the  ignorant.  The  case  is  similar  to  the 
appearance  of  space,  undivided  though  it  is,  as  if  divided  owing 
to  such  conditioning  factors  as  a  pot,  a  jar,  etc.  And  before 
obtaining  the  instruction  about  the  unity  of  the  Self  as  in, 
“That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  it  is  nothing  incongruous  to 
talk  from  that  point  of  view  in  terms  of  such  differences  as  are 
implied  by  subjects  and  objects.  But  once  the  unity  of  the 
Self  is  accepted,  there  will  surely  be  an  end  to  all  empirical 
dealings,  involving  notions  of  bondage,  liberation,  etc. 

^  II  V3  |l 


On  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  abode  and 
^-szrq^TTg;  on  account  of  its  being  designated  as  such  *T  not  so 
if  this  be  the  objection,  <T  not  so;  ^  f^RT^Jcqiq  for 

this  is  so  for  the  sake  of  contemplation  ^  and  (this  is) 

analogous  to  space. 

7.  If  it  be  objected  that  the  supreme  Self  is  not  taught  here , 
because  of  the  smallness  of  the  abode  a?id  because  of  its  being 
referred  to  as  such ,  then  we  say  :  No,  for  this  is  done  for  the 
sake  of  contemplation,  as  is  seen  in  the  case  of  space. 

Arbhaka  means  small  (tiny),  and  okas  means  nest  (abode). 
It  was  argued  that  because  the  inmost  Self  has  a  limited  abode, 
as  stated  in,  “This  is  my  Self  within  the  heart”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  3), 
and  because  the  Upani$ad  mentions  its  subtleness  in  clear  words 
in  “subtler  than  a  grain  of  paddy  or  barley”  (ibid.),  the  em- 


1 16  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  [I.ii.7 

bodied  soul  of  the  size  of  the  tip  of  a  goading  rod  (Sv.  V.  8), 
must  have  been  taught  here,  and  not  the  all-pervasive  supreme 
Self.  That  criticism  has  to  be  refuted.  With  regard  to  this  we 
say:  That  is  no  defect.  While  it  is  impossible  from  every  point 
of  view  to  assert  all-pervasiveness  for  something  that  is  spatially 
limited,  it  is  possible  in  the  case  of  the  omnipresent  One  to 
speak  of  limited  presence  in  some  sense  because  of  existence 
everywhere,  just  as  a  king  ruling  over  the  whole  earth  can  be 
referred  to  as  the  king  of  Ayodhya. 

Opponent :  From  what  standpoint,  again,  is  omnipresent  God, 
spoken  of  as  having  a  tiny  abode  and  minuteness? 

Vedantin  :  We  say  that  this  is  declared  thus  for  the  sake  of 
being  contemplated  on.  That  God,  possessed  of  a  set  of  such 
qualities  as  subtleness,  is  taught  to  be  meditated  on  there  in  the 
lotus  of  the  heart,  just  as  (the  Lord)  Hari  is  taught  to  be 
worshipped  on  a  Sdlagrdma  (stone  symbol).  A  certain  state  of 
the  intellect,  (brought  about  by  the  Upani$adic  instruction), 
catches  a  glimpse  of  Him  there.  God,  though  omnipresent, 
becomes  gracious  when  worshipped  there.  And  this  is  to  be 
understood  on  the  analogy  of  space.  Just  as  space,  though  all- 
pervasive,  is  referred  to  as  having  a  limited  habitation  and 
minuteness  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  association  with  the 
eye  of  a  needle,  so  also  is  the  case  with  Brahman.  Thus  the 
limited  habitation  and  subtleness  being  declared  for  the  sake  of 
meditation,  these  do  not  belong  to  Brahman  in  any  real  sense. 
Hereby  is  set  at  rest  the  doubt  that  might  arise  in  this  matter 
that,  since  Brahman  has  the  heart  as  Its  habitation,  since  the 
hearts  differ  in  different  bodies,  and  since  parrots  and  others, 
having  different  habitations,  suffer  from  the  defects  of  being 
many  in  number,  limited  by  bodies,  and  impermanent,  there¬ 
fore  Brahman  too  will  incur  those  faults. 

*  II 

S^TSTTfa:  Experience  (of  happiness  and  sorrow)  will  be  His 

lot  if  such  be  the  objection,  *T  not  so,  because 

of  difference. 

8 .  If  it  be  objected  that  God  will  be  subject  to  the  experience 


I.ii.8]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  117 

(of  happiness  and  sorrow  as  a  result  of  unity),  we  say ,  not  so, 
for  there  is  a  difference . 

Opponent :  Since  Brahman  is  connected  with  the  hearts  of 
all  beings  on  account  of  Its  all-pervasiveness  like  space,  and 
since  It  is  non-different  from  the  embodied  soul  owing  to  Its 
nature  of  Consciousness,  therefore  the  conclusion  may  be 
drawn  that  Brahman  will  experience  happiness  and  sorrow  just 
like  others.  And  this  must  be  so  because  of  oneness.  For  apart 
from  the  supreme  Self,  there  is  no  transmigrating  soul,  as  is 
denied  in  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “There  is  no  other  witness  but 
Him”  (Bf.  III.  vii.  23).  Hence  It  is  the  supreme  Self  Itself  that 
undergoes  transmigration. 

Vedantin  :  No,  “since  there  is  a  difference”.  To  explain:  Just 
because  Brahman  has  some  relationship  with  the  hearts  of  all 
beings,  it  does  not  follow  that  Brahman  experiences  happiness  and 
sorrow  like  the  embodied  souls;  for  there  is  a  difference.  There 
is  forsooth  a  difference  between  the  embodied  soul  and  the 
supreme  God.  The  one  is  an  agent,  an  experiencer  (of  happi¬ 
ness  and  sorrow),  a  source  of  merit,  demerit,  etc.,  and  possessed 
of  happiness  and  sorrow,  while  the  other  is  just  the  opposite, 
being  possessed  of  such  qualities  as  freedom  from  sin,  and  so  on, 
Because  of  this  distinction  between  the  two,  the  one  has  experi¬ 
ences,  but  not  the  other.  If  from  the  mere  fact  of  proximity,  and 
without  any  reference  to  the  intrinsic  nature  of  things,  a  causal 
relation  with  some  effect  is  postulated,  then  space,  for  instance, 
can  as  well  become  burnt,  (it  being  connected  with  fire).  And 
this  objection  has  to  be  met  and  refuted  equally  by  all  those 
who  hold  the  view  that  the  souls  are  many  and  all-pervasive. 

There  was  the  argument,  that  since  Brahman  is  non-dual,  no 
other  Self  can  exist;  and  hence  there  is  the  possibility  that  when 
one  Self  has  any  experience,  Brahman  too  must  have  it.  In 
refutation  of  this  we  say:  Apropos  of  this,  you  have  to  be  asked, 
“a  favourite  of  the  gods”  (i.e.  a  fool)  that  you  are,  how  do 
you  cling  to  the  view  that  there  is  no  other  soul? 

Opponent :  On  the  authority  of  such  texts  as,  “That  thou 
art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  “I  am  Brahman”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  10),  “There 
is  no  other  witness  but  Him”  (Br.  III.  vii.  23). 


118 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.ii.8 


Vedantin :  In  that  case,  the  meaning  of  the  scripture  should 
be  interpreted  in  the  way  it  should  be,  and  you  cannot  resort 
to  anything  here  analogous  to  an  old  hag  with  her  one  half 
young  (and  the  other  old).7  Now  while  the  scriptural  text, 
“That  thou  art”,  teaches  that  the  Brahman  possessed  of  the 
qualities  like  freedom  from  sin,  and  so  on,  is  the  Self  of  the 
embodied  being,  it  also  denies  thereby  any  experience  for  the 
embodied  Self  Itself.  So  how  can  there  be  any  talk  of  any 
experience  accruing  to  Brahman  from  that  of  the  embodied 
Self?  On  the  contrary,  so  long  as  the  aspirant  has  not  under¬ 
stood  the  oneness  of  the  embodied  Self  with  Brahman,  the 
experience  of  happiness  and  sorrow  by  the  embodied  being  is  a 
result  of  false  ignorance,  and  Brahman,  the  highest  Reality, 
cannot  be  touched  by  it.  For  the  sky  does  not  really  become 
possessed  of  a  surface  (i.e.  concavity)  or  tainted  by  dirt  etc. 
which  the  ignorant  fancy  on  it.  That  fact  is  stated  in,  “Not  so, 
for  there  is  a  difference”.  Not  even,  owing  to  the  fact  of  unity, 
is  Brahman  affected  by  any  experience  undergone  by  the 
embodied  soul;  for  there  is  a  difference,  inasmuch  as  true 
knowledge  differs  from  false  ignorance  etc.  The  experience  of 
happiness  etc.  is  cooked  up  by  false  ignorance,  while  unity  is 
seen  through  real  knowledge.  And  it  is  never  a  fact  that  a 
thing  perceived  through  real  knowledge  is  affected  by  any 
experience  under  false  ignorance.  Accordingly,  it  is  not  possible 
to  fancy  the  slightest  touch  of  the  experience  of  happiness  and 
sorrow  in  God. 


Topic  2:  The  Eater 

3TtTT  II  £11 

3RIT  The  eater  ^-3F*T-t^uliqon  account  of  the  appropriation 
of  the  movable  and  immovable. 

9.  The  eater  (is  God),  on  account  of  the  appropriation  of  all 
that  moves  and  does  not  move . 

Doubt :  We  read  in  the  Kathopanisad:  “How  can  one  know 

7  If  you  stand  by  the  Vcdic  text,  then  follow  it  to  the  bitter  end,  and 
there  can  be  no  half-way  house. 


I.ii.9]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  119 

thus  as  to  where  It  (the  Self)  is,  for  which  both  the  Brahma^a 
and  the  K$atriya  become  rice  (food)  and  for  whom  death  takes 
the  place  of  a  curry  (or  ghee  etc.  poured  on  rice)?”  (I.  ii.  25). 
Here  we  are  apprised  of  some  eater  indicated  by  the  mention 
of  rice  and  its  adjunct  (curry).  Now  who  can  this  eater  be? 
Is  it  fire  or  the  individual  soul,  or  is  it  the  supreme  Self?  This 
is  the  doubt,  for  no  conclusive  distinction  is  in  evidence,  and 
it  is  seen  in  this  book  that  questions  are  put  (to  Death  by 
Naciketas)  with  regard  to  three  entities — Fire,  individual  soul, 
and  the  supreme  Self.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  The  eater  is  Fire. 

Why? 

Because  this  is  gathered  from  the  familiar  use  in  such  texts  as, 
“Fire  is  the  eater  of  food”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  6),  as  well  as  common 
parlance.  Or  the  individual  soul  may  be  the  eater,  for  there  is 
the  text,  “One  of  them  eats  the  fruits  of  divergent  tastes  (sweet 
or  sour)”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1).  But  it  cannot  be  the  supreme  Self,  for 
there  is  the  text,  “The  other  looks  on  without  eating”  (ibid.). 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  The  eater  here 
should  be  the  supreme  Self. 

Why? 

Because  of  his  appropriation  of  all  that  moves  and  does  not 
move.  For  all  movable  and  immovable  things  appear  here  as  the 
eatable  thing  with  death  as  its  (pouring)  adjunct.  None  but 
the  supreme  Self  can  consume  such  a  food  fully.  As  for  the 
supreme  Self,  it  is  quite  possible  to  assert  that  He  devours  all, 
inasmuch  as  He  withdraws  everything  into  Himself  during 
dissolution. 

Opponent :  But  the  appropriation  of  all  that  moves  and  does 
not  move  is  not  stated  here.  How  can  then  the  appropriation 
of  all  movable  and  unmovable  things  be  accepted  as  an  estab¬ 
lished  fact  to  be  advanced  as  a  ground  (for  inferring  God)? 

Vedantin  :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  because  when  Death  is 
mentioned  as  the  curry,  all  beings  present  themselves  along  wi^h 
it,8  and  because  the  Brahma^as  and  K§atriyas  are  cited  by  way 

“The  word  H‘food”  is  used  figuratively  for  destructible  things;  and  this 
figurative  meaning  becomes  obvious  from  the  use  of  the  word  death  in 
its  vicinity.  Food  is  destructible,  and  so  are  all  beings  subject  to  death. 


120  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  ii.  9 

of  suggesting  (all  beings),  they  being  the  chief  among  them. 

As  for  the  argument  that  even  the  supreme  Self  cannot  be 
the  eater  in  the  face  of  the  Upani$adic  revelation,  “The  other 
looks  on  without  eating”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1),  we  say:  This  revela¬ 
tion  is  meant  to  deny  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  action, 
for  that  is  near  at  hand  (to  the  text).  That  is  not  a  denial  of 
the  dissolution  of  all  things  (figuratively  denoted  by  eating), 
inasmuch  as  Brahman  is  well  known  in  all  the  Upani$ads  as 
the  cause  of  creation,  sustenance,  and  dissolution.  Therefore  the 
supreme  Self  alone  can  be  the  devourer  here. 

II  II 

10 .  And  (this  follows)  from  the  context . 

For  this  additional  reason  it  is  the  supreme  Self  alone  that 
can  be  the  eater  here;  for  this  topic,  starting  with,  “The 
enlightened  (or  knowing)  One  is  neither  bom  nor  does  He 
die”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  18),  is  of  the  supreme  Self.  And  it  is  proper 
that  the  entity  constituting  the  subject  of  the  context  should 
be  accepted  as  the  eater.  The  difficulty  about  “knowing”  (the 
Self)  as  stated  in,  “How  can  one  know  thus?”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  28),  is 
also  a  pointer  to  the  supreme  Self. 

Topic  3:  The  Two  in  the  Cavity  of  the  Heart 

srf4KMIc^Flt  II  \\  II 

The  two  that  have  entered  *p?T  into  the  cavity 
(are)  the  two  Selfs  because  that  is  what  is  seen. 

11.  The  two  who  have  entered  into  the  cavity  ( of  the  heart) 
are  the  individual  Self  and  the  supreme  Self ,  for  that  is  what  is 
seen  (in  other  texts). 

Doubt :  In  the  Katfia  Upani$ad  itself  we  read:  “The  knowers 
of  Brahman,  the  worshippers  of  the  five  fires,  and  those  who 
perform  the  Ndciketa  sacrifice  thrice,  compare  to  shade  and 
light,  the  two  drinkers  of  rta  (inevitable  results)  of  one’s  work, 
who  have  entered  into  the  body,  into  the  cavity  (of  the  heart) 


I.ii.ll]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  121 

which  is  the  supreme  abode  of  the  Most  High”  (I.  iii.  1).  With 
regard  to  this  the  doubt  arises:  Are  the  intellect  and  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul  mentioned  here,  or  the  individual  soul  and  the 
supreme  Self?  If  the  intellect  and  the  soul  be  referred  to,  then 
the  text  establishes  that  the  soul  is  different  from  the  assemblage 
of  body  and  organs  in  which  the  intellect  predominates.  That 
soul  also  has  to  be  presented  here,  for  it  has  been  sought  for 
in  the  question,  “The  doubt  that  arises,  consequent  on  the 
death  of  a  man,  some  saying  that  he  exists  and  others  that  he 
does  not — I  would  know  this  under  your  instruction.  This  is 
the  third  of  the  three  boons”  (Ka.  I.  i.  20).  If,  however,  the 
soul  and  the  supreme  Self  be  referred  to,  then  it  is  the  supreme 
Self,  distinct  from  the  individual  soul,  that  is  propounded  here. 
And  that  too  has  to  be  expounded,  It  having  been  inquired  into 
through  the  question,  “Tell  me  of  that  which  you  see  as 
different  from  virtue,  different  from  vice,  different  from  these 
cause  and  effect,  different  from  the  past  and  the  future”  (Ka. 
I.  ii.  14). 

With  regard  to  this  the  opponent  says:  Neither  of  these  two 
alternatives  is  admissible. 

Why? 

The  phrase  “drinking  of  rta”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  1)  implies  the 
experiencing  of  the  fruit  of  works,  for  there  is  an  indicatory 
mark  of  this  in  “the  result  of  one’s  own  work  in  this  body” 
(ibid.);  and  that  is  possible  for  a  sentient  being  aware  of  the 
body,  but  not  for  the  insentient  intellect.  Besides,  by  the  word 
pibantauy  in  the  dual  number,  the  Upani$ad  points  to  the  drinking 
by  both.  Accordingly,  it  is  not  possible  to  side  with  the  soul 
and  the  intellect;  and  for  this  very  reason  it  is  not  possible  to 
side  with  the  individual  soul  and  the  supreme  Self,  for  it  is 
impossible  even  for  the  conscious  supreme  Self  to  enjoy  the 
fruits  of  work,  this  having  been  denied  in  the  mantra  text,  “The 
other  looks  on  without  eating”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1). 

In  answer  the  doubter  says:  That  raises  no  difficulty.  It  is 
seen  that  in  the  statement,  “The  people  with  umbrella  are 
going”,  a  single  possessor  of  an  umbrella  (viz  a  king)  gives  the 
figurative  epithet  of  “people  with  umbrella”  to  a  whole  group. 
Similarly,  from  the  fact  that  one  experiences,  both  may  be 


122  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  1 1 

said  to  be  experiencing.  Or  it  may  be  thus:  The  individual 
being  alone  experiences  and  God  makes  him  experience.  And 
because  He  causes  the  experience,  He  is  said  to  be  experiencing 
on  the  analogy  of  the  familiar  fact  that  one  who  makes  others 
cook  is  said  to  be  cooking.  It  is  also  possible  to  accept  the 
intellect  and  the  individual  soul,  there  being  a  figurative  use 
of  agentship  in  the  case  of  the  instrument  (viz  intellect),  for 
such  an  expression  as,  “The  fuel  cooks”,  is  possible.  And  in  a 
context  of  the  body,  no  other  pair  of  experiencers  of  the  fruit 
of  works  is  possible.  Hence  this  doubt.  Should  they  be  either 
the  intellect  and  the  individual  soul  or  the  individual  soul  and 
the  supreme  Self?  What  should  be  the  conclusion  here? 

Opponent :  They  must  be  the  intellect  and  the  individual 
soul. 

Why? 

Because  there  is  the  qualification,  “have  entered  into  the 
cavity”.  Whether  the  word  cavity  means  the  body  or  the  heart, 
in  either  case  it  stands  to  reason  that  the  intellect  and  the 
individual  soul  have  entered  into  that  cavity.  Besides,  if  an 
alternative  explanation  is  possible,  it  is  not  proper  to  fancy  any 
particular  location  for  the  omnipresent  Brahman.  Moreover, 
the  expression,  “of  the  result  of  one’s  own  work  in  the  body”, 
shows  the  non-transcendence  of  the  limits  of  the  results  of 
work.  The  supreme  Self  is  not  confined  within  the  limits  of 
merit  and  demerit,  as  shown  in,  “it  neither  increases  nor 
decreases  through  work”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  23).  And  the  terms  light 
and  shade  point  to  the  sentient  and  insentient,  they  being 
opposed  to  each  other  like  light  and  shade  (Ka.  I.  iii.  1).  There¬ 
fore  the  intellect  and  the  individual  soul  are  to  be  accepted  as 
spoken  of  here. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  The  individual 
Self,  identified  with  the  intellect,  and  the  supreme  Self  have 
been  spoken  of  here. 

Why  so? 

Because  both  these  are  Selfs  as  well  as  conscious  and  have 
the  same  nature.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  experience,  that  in  a  case 
of  enumeration,  people  take  it  for  granted  that  units  of  the 
same  class  are  being  told  off.  When  somebody  says,  “A  second 


I.  ii.  12] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


123 


one  to  (i.e.  a  companion  for)  this  cow  has  to  be  sought  for”,  a 
cow  alone  is  sought  out,  but  neither  a  horse  nor  a  man.  Similarly 
in  the  present  case,  when,  after  the  individual  Self,  identified 
with  the  intellect,  has  been  ascertained  with  the  help  of  the 
indicatory  mark  of  experiencing  the  fruits  of  work,  a  search 
for  a  second  entity  starts,  the  supreme  Self  which  is  of  the 
same  nature  comes  within  our  ken. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  after  noticing  the  fact  of 
remaining  in  the  cavity,  the  supreme  Self  cannot  be  cognized? 

Veddntin :  We  say:  The  supreme  Self  is  to  be  cognized 
from  the  very  fact  of  remaining  in  the  cavity;  for  the  fact  of 
remaining  within  the  cavity  is  very  often  declared  in  the 
Vedas  and  the  Smftis  with  regard  to  the  supreme  Self  Itself,  as 
in,  “The  enlightened  one  gives  up  happiness  and  sorrow  by 
developing  concentration  of  mind  on  the  old  Deity  who  is 
inscrutable,  lodged  inaccessibly,  located  in  the  cavity  (of  the 
heart),  and  seated  in  the  midst  of  misery”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  12),  “He 
who  knows  the  supreme  One,  seated  in  the  supreme  space 
within  the  cavity  (of  the  heart)”  (Tai.  II.  i),  “Seek  for  the 
Self  that  has  entered  into  the  cavity”,  and  so  on.  And  we 
stated  earlier  that  it  involves  no  contradiction  to  teach  about 
any  place  as  suitable  for  the  realization  of  Brahman,  omnipresent 
though  It  is.  As  for  the  existence  amidst  the  well  earned  results 
of  work,  although  this  is  possible  for  one  only,  it  can  be 
asserted  for  both  on  the  analogy  of  the  “people  with  umbrella”. 
The  expression  “light  and  shade”  is  also  reconcilable;  for  the 
transmigrating  Self  and  the  transcendental  Self  are  poles 
asunder  like  shade  and  light,  for  transmigration  is  a  result  of 
ignorance,  while  transcendence  of  transmigration  is  the  supreme 
reality.  Therefore  the  soul  identified  with  the  intellect  and  the 
supreme  Self  are  to  be  recognized  as  the  two  who  have  entered 
into  the  cavity. 

For  what  additional  reason  are  the  soul  identified  with  the 
intellect  and  the  supreme  Self  to  be  accepted? 

ii  w  n 

12.  And  because  there  is  a  specification. 


124  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  I.  ii.  12 

And  the  specification  (made  in  the  Upani$ad)  applies  to  the 
soul  identified  with  the  intellect  and  the  supreme  Self  alone. 
In  the  subsequent  text  commencing  with,  “Know  the  Self  to 
be  the  rider  of  the  chariot,  but  the  body  to  be  the  chariot” 
etc.  (Ka.  I.  iii.  3),  which  calls  up  the  imagery  of  the  chariot 
and  the  rider  of  the  chariot,  the  Self  identified  with  the  intellect 
is  imagined  as  the  rider  of  the  chariot  who  has  to  reach  either 
the  worldly  state  or  liberation.  And  the  supreme  Self  is 
imagined  as  the  goal  to  be  reached  in,  “He  attains  the  end  of 
the  road,  and  that  is  the  supreme  state  of  Vi$iju”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  9). 
In  the  preceding  text  also  these  two  are  specified  as  the  thinker 
and  the  object  of  thought  in  the  verse,  “The  intelligent  man 
gives  up  happiness  and  sorrow  by  developing  concentration  of 
mind  on  the  Self  and  thereby  meditating  on  the  old  Deity  who 
is  inscrutable,  lodged  inaccessibly  in  Maya,  located  in  the 
intellect,  and  seated  in  the  midst  of  misery”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  12). 
Besides,  this  is  the  topic  of  the  supreme  Self.  And  the  expres¬ 
sion,  “The  knowers  of  Brahman  say”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  1),  which 
posits  a  special  class  of  speakers,  becomes  justifiable  if  the 
supreme  Self  is  accepted.  Therefore  it  is  to  be  admitted  that  the 
individual  Self  and  the  supreme  Self  are  spoken  of  here. 

This  line  of  approach  has  to  be  adopted  with  regard  to  “Two 
birds,  ever  associated  and  having  similar  names  (cling  to  the 
same  tree)”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1,  Sv.  IV.  6),  and  such  other  texts. 
There  also  the  ordinary  birds  are  not  spoken  of,  since  the  topic 
centres  round  the  soul.  In  the  text,  “Of  these  two,  the  one 
eats  the  fruits  of  divergent  tastes”  (ibid.),  the  individual  Self  is 
to  be  understood  on  the  strength  of  the  indicatory  marks  of 
eating.  And  in,  “The  other  looks  on  without  eating”  (ibid.), 
the  supreme  Self  is  to  be  understood  on  the  strength  of  non¬ 
eating  and  consciousness.  In  the  succeeding  mantra  also  these 
two  are  specified  as  the  seer  and  object  seen:  “On  the  same 
tree,  the  individual  soul  remains  *  drowned  (i.e.  stuck),  as  it 
were;  and  so  it  moans,  being  worried  by  its  impotence.  When 
it  sees  thus  the  other,  the  adored  Lord,  and  His  glory,  then  it 
becomes  liberated  from  sorrow”  (Mu.  III.  i.  2). 

Others  say:  The  mantra  “Two  birds”  etc.  (Mu.  III.  i.  1) 
does  not  agree  with  the  conclusion  arrived  at  under  the  present 


I. ii.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  125 

topic.  For  in  the  Paingi-rahasya-brahmana  it  is  explained  thus 
— “The  expression,  ‘Of  these  two,  the  one  eats  the  fruits  of 
divergent  tastes’,  refers  to  the  sattva ,  and  ‘the  other  looks  on 
without  eating’  means  the  jna  (lit.  knower)  who  witnesses 
without  eating.  So  the  sattva  and  ksetrajna  (lit.  knower  of  the 
field  or  body)  are  meant.”  It  may  be  argued  that  the  word 
sattva  means  the  individual  soul  and  ksetrajna  means  the  supreme 
Self;  but  that  is  wrong,  because  the  words  sattva  and  ksetrajna 
are  well  known  as  meaning  the  internal  organ  (mind)  and  the 
embodied  soul,  and  because  the  explanation  is  given  in  that  very 
text  thus:  “That  thing  is  sattva  by  which  one  sees  dreams,  and 
that  which  is  the  embodied  witness  is  the  ksetrajna ;  these  two 
are  the  sattva  and  ksetrajna .” 

Vedmtin :  And  yet  this  cannot  be  said  to  be  opposed  to  the 
present  topic,  for  the  embodied  Self,  called  the  ksetrajna,  is 
not  presented  here  (in  the  Paiiigi-Bralymana)  as  endowed  with 
such  worldly  qualities  as  agentship  and  enjoyership. 

How  is  it  presented  then? 

It  is  presented  as  free  from  all  worldly  qualities  and  identical 
in  nature  with  Brahman  Itself — with  pure  Consciousness — as 
stated  in,  “  ‘The  other  looks  on  without  eating’  means,  ‘the 
knower  who  witnesses  without  eating’.”  And  this  is  supported 
by  such  Vedic  and  Smjti  texts  as,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7),  “Me  do  thou  also  know  to  be  the  ksetrajna”  (Gita, 
XIII.  2).  The  conclusion  made  thus  with  that  much  (i.e.  the 
explanation,  of  the  mantra)  only,  in  the  words,  “The  two  are 
the  sattva  and  ksetrajna .  Ignorance  has  no  effect  on  a  man  of 
such  knowledge”  etc.,  becomes  justifiable  only  on  this  assump¬ 
tion  (that  the  individual  soul  is  spoken  of  as  Brahman). 

Opponent :  From  such  a  point  of  view,  how  can  enjoyership 
be  ascribed  to  the  insentient  mind  by  saying,  “  ‘One  of  them 
eats  the  fruits  of  divergent  tastes’  means  the  sattva  (i.e.  the 
internal  organ)”? 

The  answer  is:  This  Vedic  text  does  not  start  with  the  idea, 
“I  shall  speak  of  the  enjoyership  of  the  insentient.” 

What  is  the  idea  then? 

The  idea  is:  “I  shall  show  that  the  sentient  individual  is  not 
the  experiencer,  but  it  is  Brahman  by  nature.”  It  is  for  this 


126 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.ii.  12 


purpose  that  enjoyership  is  attributed  to  the  mind  which  is 
subject  to  worldly  moods  like  happiness  and  sorrow  etc.  For 
these  states  of  being  an  agent  and  experiencer  are  fancied  on 
the  soul  and  the  mind,  owing  to  a  non-discrimination  between 
their  natures.  In  reality  these  are  possible  in  neither  of  them; 
for  the  mind  is  insentient  and  the  soul  is  changeless.  This  is  all 
the  more  impossible  in  the  mind,  it  being  a  creation  of  igno¬ 
rance.  In  support  of  this  here  is  a  Vedic  text:  “Because  when 
there  is  difference,  as  it  were,  then  one  sees  another”  (By.  IV. 
v.  15),  where  it  is  shown  that  dealings  based  on  agentship  etc. 
can  be  possible  only  within  the  range  of  ignorance  in  the 
same  sense  as  it  is  possible  to  deal  with  elephants  etc.  present 
in  a  dream.  And  by  the  text,  “But  when  to  the  knower  of 
Brahman  everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what  should 
one  see  and  through  what?”  (ibid.),  are  denied  for  the  discrimi¬ 
nating  man  such  dealings  based  on  agentship  etc. 

Topic  4:  The  Person  in  the  Eye 

3RR  3TO:  II  II 

The  one  inside  for  that  is  logical. 

13.  The  One  inside  (is  God),  for  that  is  logical. 

Doubt :  We  read  in  the  Upanisad:  “He  (viz  Satyakama 
Jabala)  said  (to  Upakosala)  ‘The  One,  the  Person  (Puru$a) 
seen  in  the  eye,  is  the  Self.  This  One  is  immortal,  fearless;  this 
One  is  Brahman.  Accordingly,  if  clarified  butter  or  water  be 
poured  on  it  (i.e.  the  eye),  it  flows  down  to  the  eyelids”  etc. 
(Ch.  IV.  xv.  1).  Now  the  doubt  arises  here:  Is  a  shadowy 
being,  reflected  on  the  eye,  indicated  here?  Or  is  it  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul  identified  with  the  intellect?  Or  is  it  some  divine 
being  presiding  over  the  eye?  Of  is  it  God?  What  should  be 
the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  It  is  a  shadowy  being,  a  reflection  of  some  person 
(on  the  eye);  for  that  is  well  known  as  an  object  of  perception, 
and  because  it  is  taught  as  a  familiar  thing  in,  “The  being  that 
is  seen  in  the  eye”  (ibid.).  Or  this  may  properly  be  an  instruc- 


I.  ii.  14] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


127 


tion  about  the  soul  identified  with  the  intellect.  For  it  is  this 
being  that  comes  nearest  to  the  eye  when  perceiving  colour 
through  it,  and  the  word  Self  becomes  apposite  in  this  case. 
Or  the  being  in  the  sun  that  helps  the  eye  is  to  be  cognized 
here,  because  the  Upanisadic  text  states,  “He  (i.e.  the  being  in 
the  sun)  rests  on  the  latter  (i.e.  the  right  eye)  through  the 
rays’1  (Hr.  V.  v.  2),  and  because  immortality  etc.  can  somehow 
be  averred  of  the  divine  being  (in  the  sun)  as  well.  But  that 
being  is  not  God,  since  a  particular  locality  is  indicated. 

Vedtintin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say,  God  Himself  is 
taught  here  as  the  being  in  the  eye. 

Why? 

Because  that  stands  to  reason;  for  the  number  of  qualities 
taught  here  can  logically  belong  to  God.  Of  these,  the  fact  of 
being  the  Self  applies  to  Brahman  in  the  primary  sense,  for  the 
Upani$ad  says,  “He  is  the  Self.  That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii. 
7).  And  immortality  and  fearlessness  are  frequently  declared 
about  Brahman  in  the  Upani$ads.  Similarly,  this  eye  as  a  seat 
is  appropriate  for  God.  Just  as  God  is  untouched  by  all 
blemishes,  His  freedom  from  sin  etc.  having  been  spoken  of  in 
the  Upani$ads,  so  is  the  eye  presented  as  a  place  untarnished  by 
any  blemish  in  the  text,  “Accordingly,  if  clarified  butter  or 
water  be  poured  on  it,  it  flows  down  to  the  eyelids”  (Ch.  IV.  xv. 

1) .  And  the  instruction  about  such  qualities  as  being  the  “resort 
of  all  blessings”,  (as  stated  in  the  following  text),  fits  in  with 
Him:  “They  call  Him  the  ‘goal  of  the  results  of  actions’,  for 
all  the  results  of  actions  proceed  towards  Him”  (Ch.  IV.  xv. 

2) ;  “This  One  is  certainly  the  carrier  of  all  good  results,  for 
it  is  this  One  that  carries  all  good  results  of  works  (to  their 
recipients)”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  3);  “This  One  is  certainly  the 
‘ordainer  of  all  effulgence’,  for  it  is  this  One  that  shines  in  all 
the  worlds”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  4).  Therefore  the  One  inside  is  God, 
for  that  is  logical. 


n  ii 

^  And  from  the  mention  of  the  place  etc. 

14.  And  ( this  follows)  from  the  mention  of  place  etc. 


128  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAgYA  [I.  ii.  14 

How  again  can  it  be  logical  for  Brahman,  omnipresent  as  It 
is  like  space,  to  have  a  tiny  seat  like  the  eye? 

With  regard  to  this  it  is  said:  This  illogicality  would  have 
been  there  if  it  had  been  the  only  place  indicated  for  Brahman. 
But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  there  are  other  places  like  the  earth, 
which  are  indicated  for  It  by  the  text,  “He  who  inhabits  the 
earth,  but  is  within  it”  etc.  (Bj\  III.  vii.  3).  Among  these  places, 
the  eye  too  is  counted:  “He  who  inhabits  the  eye,  but  is  within 
it”  etc.  (Bj\  III.  vii.  18).  What  is  implied  in  the  aphorism  by 
the  use  of  “etc.”  in  “the  mention  of  place  etc.”  is  this:  The 
mention  of  location  alone  for  Brahman  is  not  the  only  irrecon¬ 
cilability. 

What  else  is  irreconcilable? 

Name  and  form  etc.  Though  Brahman  is  without  name  and 
form,  such  things  are  seen  to  be  ascribed  to  It  in,  “His  name  is 
Ut ”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  7),  “His  beard  is  golden”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  6),  and  so 
on.  And  it  has  been  already  said  that  though  Brahman  is  without 
qualities,  still  for  the  sake  of  meditation,  It  is  presented  in  those 
respective  places  as  a  qualified  entity,  possessed  of  the  charac¬ 
teristics  associated  with  name  and  form.  It  has  also  been  stated 
that  even  for  the  omnipresent  Brahman  it  is  nothing  incongruous 
to  have  certain  special  places  for  meditation  like  the  Sdlagrama 
(stone  symbol)  for  Vi$ou. 

^  II  II 

k-*i  r*i  m  m  ^  i 

15.  And  this  is  so  for  the  further  reason  that  the  One  pos¬ 
sessed  of  bliss  is  referred  to  (in  the  Text ,  uThe  One  that”). 

Moreover,  there  should  certainly  be  no  quarrel  here  as  to 
whether  Brahman  is  spoken  of  here  in  this  sentence  or  not. 
For  from  the  very  fact  that  the  one  possessed  of  bliss  is  men¬ 
tioned  by  the  text,  “The  One  that”  etc.  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  1-4),  it 
follows  that  Brahman  is  meant;  for  Brahman  is  possessed  of 
bliss.  The  very  entity  introduced  at  the  commencement  of  the 
text,  viz  uPrdna  is  Brahman,  bliss  is  Brahman,  space  is  Brahman” 
(Ch.  IV.  x.  4),  is  spoken  of  here  (in  “The  One  that”);  for  it 


I.  ii.  15]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  129 

is  reasonable  to  accept  that  which  is  under  discussion.  Besides, 
this  must  be  the  conclusion,  because  the  instruction  about  the 
course  (followed  after  death)  was  alone  promised  to  be  spoken 
of  in,  “But  the  teacher  will  tell  you  of  the  course”9  (Ch.  IV. 
xiv.  1). 

Opponent :  How  again  is  it  known  that  Brahman,  possessed 
of  bliss,  is  spoken  of  at  the  commencement  of  the  text? 

Vedantin  :  The  answer  is:  Hearing  these  words  of  the  Fires, 
“ Prana  is  Brahman,  bliss  ( kam )  is  Brahman,  space  ( kham )  is 
Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  x.  5),  Upakosala  said,  “I  know  that  Prana 
is  Brahman;  but  I  do  not  know  bliss  ( kam )  or  space  (kham)” 
(ibid.).  To  that,  this  is  the  reply  (of  the  Fires):  “That  which 
is  bliss  (kam)  is  space  (kham),  and  that  which  is  space  (kham) 
is  bliss  (kam)”  (ibid.).  Of  these  the  word  space  (kham)  is 
familiar  as  a  synonym  of  the  material  space.  Had  not  the  word 
kam ,  meaning  bliss,  been  used  to  qualify  kham ,  it  would  have 
seemed  that  the  word  Brahman  is  applied  to  the  mere  material 
space  in  order  to  present  space  as  a  symbol  like  name  etc. 
Similarly,  the  word  kam  is  familiarly  in  use  with  regard  to  the 
defective  (worldly)  happiness,  arising  from  the  contact  of 
objects  and  senses.  If  it  had  not  been  qualified  by  kham  (space), 
the  idea  gathered  would  have  been  that  the  empirical  happiness 
is  Brahman.  But  the  words  bliss  and  space,  having  qualified  each 
other,  lead  us  to  the  comprehension  of  Brahman  which  is  Bliss 
Itself.  Then  again,  if  a  second  word  Brahman  had  not  been 
used,  that  is  to  say,  if  (instead  of  “ kam  Brahma  kham  brahma”) 
the  sentence  ran  thus,  “ kcm  kham  brahma — bliss  space  is 
Brahman”,  then  having  been  used  merely  as  an  adjective  (of 
kham),  bliss  (as  an  aspect  of  Brahman)  would  not  have  become 
an  object  of  meditation.  To  avert  that  possibility,  both  the 

•Upakosala  stayed  with  his  teacher  Satyakama  Jabala  for  twelve  years. 
But  the  teacher  went  out  on  a  sojourn  without  instructing  Upakosala 
about  Brahman.  This  upset  the  boy.  But  the  four  sacrificial  fires,  tended 
so  long  with  care  by  him,  revealed  their  individual  secrets  to  him,  in¬ 
structed  him  saying,  “Prana  is  Brahman”  and  so  on,  and  concluded  by 
saying  that  the  teacher  would  tell  him  of  the  course.  Then  the  teacher 
returned,  and  starting  with,  ‘‘The  One  that  is  the  Purasa  seen  in  the 
eye”,  told  him  of  the  course  (see  text  below). 

9 


130  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  15 

words  bliss  and  space  precede  the  word  Brahman  (separately) 
in  (bliss  is  Brahman,  space  is  Brahman).  For  the  intention  is 
that  the  aspect  of  bliss  should  be  as  much  an  object  of  medita¬ 
tion  as  the  entity  qualified  by  it.  Thus  it  is  that  at  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  text,  Brahman  possessed  of  bliss  is  spoken  of. 
And  each  of  the  Fires — Garhapatya  and  others — first  speaks  of 
his  personal  glory;  and  then  they  all  conclude  with  the  words, 
“ O  amiable  one,  thus  is  imparted  to  you  the  knowledge  about 
us  as  also  about  the  Self”  (Ch.  IV.  xiv.  1),  thereby  suggesting 
that  Brahman  (Self)  had  been  referred  to  earlier.  The  state¬ 
ment,  “The  teacher  will  tell  you  of  the  course”  (ibid.),  holds 
out  a  promise  of  the  instruction  about  the  course  only,  and 
thus  precludes  the  intention  of  speaking  on  an  additional  topic. 
Moreover,  the  statement,  “As  water  does  not  stick  to  a  lotus 
leaf,  so  also  sin  does  not  cling  to  one  who  knows  thus”  (Ch. 
IV.  xiv.  3),  while  speaking  of  the  ineffectiveness  of  sin  against 
one  who  knows  the  Puru$a  residing  in  the  eye,  shows  that 
the  Puru$a  in  the  eye  is  Brahman.  It  is  thus  that  the  Upani$ad 
first  speaks  of  the  residence  of  Brahman  in  the  eye  and  Its 
possession  of  such  virtues  as  being  the  resort  of  all  blessings, 
and  so  on.  Then  with  a  view  to  speaking  of  the  course,  starting 
with  light, 'that  a  man  with  that  kind  of  knowledge  has  to 
follow,  the  Upani$ad  goes  on:  “He  said,  ‘The  One,  the  Person 
that  is  seen  in  the  eye,  is  the  Self’  ”  etc.  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  1). 


16.  And  because  the  course  to  be  followed  by  one  who  has 
heard  the  secret  teaching  is  spoken  of. 

For  this  additional  reason,  the  Person  in  the  eye  is  God:  The 
course  known  as  the  Path  of  the  Gods  is  followed  by  one  who 
has  heard  the  Upani§ad,  the  knower  of  Brahman  who  has 
received  the  secret  knowledge  that  is  well  known  in  the  Vedic 
text,  “Again,  by  searching  for  the  Self  through  the  control 
of  the  senses,  brahmacarya  (continence),  faith,  and  meditation, 
they  conquer  the  sun  by  proceeding  along  the  Northern 


I.  ii.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  131 

Course.  This  Brahman  is  the  resort  of  all  that  lives;  this  is 
indescribable;  this  is  fearless,  this  is  the  highest  goal;10  for  from 
this  they  do  not  come  back”  (Pr.  I.  10).  This  is  well  known  in 
the  Smjti  also:  “(The  deities  of  fire,  light,  day-time,  the  bright 
fortnight,  the  six  months  of  the  northern  course  of  sun — 
taking  this  path,  the  knowers  of  Brahman  go  to  Brahman” 
(Gita,  VIII.  24).  That  very  Path  is  seen  to  be  declared  for  one 
who  knows  the  Person  in  the  eye.  Starting  with,  “Whether  they 
perform  his  funeral  rites  or  not,  he  (the  meditator  on  the  Self) 
attains  (the  deity  of)  fire,  (and  then  proceeds  along  day-time 
etc.)”,  it  is  said,  “He  proceeds  from  the  sun  to  the  moon,  from 
the  moon  to  lightning.  Some  superhuman  being,  coming  from 
the  world  of  Hiraijyagarbha,  leads  those  who  arrive  there  (i.e. 
lightning)  to  Brahman.  This  is  the  Path  of  the  Gods,  this  is  the 
Path  to  Brahman.  Those  who  attain  (the  conditioned  Brahman) 
by  proceeding  along  this  Path,  do  not  return  to  this  cycle  of 
birth  and  death,  to  this  creation  of  Manu”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5).  From 
all  this  (talk  about  the)  well-known  Course  followed  by  the 
fcnower  of  Brahman,  it  becomes  established  that  the  Person  in 
the  eye  is  Brahman. 

ll  ?V9  II 

On  account  of  impermanence  ^  and  arsswcj;  on 
account  of  impossibility,  ^  none  other  can  be  (the  Person). 

27.  None  other  can  be  the  Person  in  the  eye  on  account  of 
impermanence  and  impossibility . 

It  was  argued  that  the  Person  in  the  eye  may  be  a  shadowy 
being,  or  the  individual  Self,  or  some  divine  being.  With  regard 
to  this,  we  say:  None  among  the  shadowy  being  and  the  rest 
can  be  accepted  here. 

Why? 

Since  it  is  transitory.  To  take  up  the  shadowy  self  first,  it  is 

10  This  is  initially  the  state  of  Hiranyagarbha,  identified  with  the  cosmic 
and  microcosmic  subde  bodies.  This,  again,  is  in  essence,  the  immortal, 
fearless,  all-sustaining  absolute  Brahman.  So  they  first  realize  the  condi¬ 
tioned  and  then  the  absolute  Brahman. 


132  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  17 

not  possible  for  it  to  reside  permanently  in  the  eye.  When  a 
man  is  right  in  front  of  an  eye,  the  image  of  the  man  is  seen  in 
it;  but  when  he  moves  away,  it  cannot  be  seen.  The  text,  “The 
One,  the  Person,  that  is  there  in  the  eye”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  1), 
teaches  the  worship  of  the  Person  present  in  the  eye  just  because 
He  is  near  at  hand;  and  it  is  not  proper  to  fancy  that  at  the 
time  of  meditation,  the  meditator  places  some  person  near  him 
to  produce  an  image  in  the  eye,  and  then  he  meditates  on  it. 
For  the  text,  “This  one  gets  destroyed  in  accordance  with  the 
death  of  this  body”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  1),  shows  the  impermanence 
of  the  shadowy  being.  Besides,  this  is  impossible;  for  such 
qualities  as  immortality  cannot  be  found  in  that  shadowy  being. 
So  also  for  the  individual  soul.  Inasmuch  as  this  soul  is  in  general 
contact  with  the  body  and  senses  as  a  whole,  it  is  not  possible 
to  speak  of  its  existence  in  the  eye  alone.  But  for  Brahman, 
all-pervasive  though  It  is,  Its  association  with  special  places 
like  the  heart  for  the  sake  of  meditation  is  met  with  in  the 
Upani$ads.  Equally  impossible  is  the  presence  of  such  qualities 
as  immortality  in  the  soul  identified  with  the  intellect.  Though 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  individual  Self  is  the  same  as  the 
supreme  Self,  still  mortality  and  fear  are  superimposed  on  the 
former  through  ignorance,  desire,  and  action;  and  hence  immor¬ 
tality  and  fearlessness  do  not  fit  in  with  it.  And  such  qualities 
as  being  the  repository  of  all  good  attributes  are  also  inappro¬ 
priate  for  it,  since  it  has  no  divine  majesty.  As  for  any  divine 
being,  though  such  a  god  exists  in  the  eye  in  accordance  with 
the  Vedic  text,  “The  former  (the  being  in  the  sun)  rests  on 
the  latter  (the  being  in  the  right  eye)  through  the  rays”  (Bj% 
V.  v.  2),  still  that  god  cannot  be  the  Self,  since  he  exists 
externally.  Immortality  etc.  are  also  out  of  place,  since  the 
Vedas  mention  the  birth  and  death  of  gods,  the  immortality  of 
the  gods  being  spoken  of  only  from  the  standpoint  of  their 
long  life.  Their  majesty  too  is  dependent  on  God  and  is  not 
intrinsic,  for  the  mantra  says,  “Out  of  His  fear  the  wind  blows; 
out  of  fear  the  sun  rises;  out  of  His  fear  Fire  and  Indra  remain 
active,  and  Death,  the  fifth,  hurries  on  (to  the  dying)”  (Tai. 
II.  viii.  1).  Therefore  it  is  to  be  understood  that  God  is  the 
Being  in  the  eye.  From  this  point  of  view,  the  use  of  the  word 


I. ii.  18]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  133 

“seen  (in  the  eye)”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  1)  in  a  familiar  sense,  is  to  be 
explained  as  arising  out  of  the  scriptural  outlook,  and  as  refer¬ 
ring  to  the  vision  of  the  enlightened  man,  the  whole  thing  being 
meant  as  a  praise  for  inducing  the  aspirants  (to  this  medi¬ 
tation). 

Topic  5  :  The  Internal  Ruler 

II  ^  II 

3RWWt  The  internal  Ruler  in  the  divine  and 

other  contexts  because  the  characteristics  of  that 

are  spoken  of. 

18.  The  internal  Ruler  in  the  divine  and  other  contexts  (is  the 
supreme  Self),  since  the  characteristics  of  that  ( supreme  Self) 
are  spoken  of. 

Doubt :  Starting  with,  “the  One  who  controls  this  and  the 
next  life  and  all  beings  from  within”  (Br.  III.  vii.  1),  it  is  stated 
in  the  Upani$ad,  “(He)  who  inhabits  the  earth  but  is  within  it, 
whom  the  earth  does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the  earth,  and 
who  controls  the  earth  from  within,  is  the  internal  Ruler,  your 
own  immortal  Self”  (Bj\  III.  vii.  3).  Here — in  the  contexts  of 
the  gods,  the  worlds,  the  Vedas,  the  sacrifices,  the  creatures,  and 
the  bodies — we  hear  of  an  internal  Ruler  who  resides  inside  and 
exercises  control.  Is  he  some  divine  being,  identifying  himself 
with  things  in  the  divine  and  other  contexts;  or  some  Yogin 
who  has  acquired  the  mystic  power  of  becoming  subtle  and  so 
on;  or  the  supreme  Self;  or  some  other  entity?  This  doubt  arises 
from  noticing  this  peculiar  term  ( antarydmin ).  What  is  then  the 
true  meaning  acceptable  to  us? 

Opponent :  Since  the  term  is  uncommon,  the  entity  named 
should  be  something  uncommon  and  indeterminate.  Or  since  it 
is  not  possible  to  assert  the  existence  of  any  other  indeterminate 
thing  and  since  the  term  internal  Ruler,  conveying  the  (etymo¬ 
logical)  sense  of  controlling  from  inside,  is  not  altogether 
unfamiliar,  therefore  some  deity  identifying  himself  with  the 
earth  etc.  must  be  the  internal  Ruler.  For  in  accord  with  this 
is  the  text,  “(He  knows  truly  who  knows  that  being)  whose 


134  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  18 

abode  is  the  earth,  whose  instrument  of  vision  is  fire,  whose 
light  is  manas  (mind),  (and  who  is  the  ultimate  resort  of  the 
entire  body  and  organs)”  (Bf.  III.  ix.  10).  Since  by  being 
possessed  of  body  and  organs,  he  rules  by  residing  inside  the 
earth  etc.,  this  rulership  can  justifiably  belong  to  a  divine  being. 
Or  this  rulership  can  belong  to  some  perfected  Yogin  who 
rules  by  entering  into  all.  But  the  supreme  Self  does  not  come 
within  our  purview,  since  It  is  not  possessed  of  body  and  organs. 

Vedaniin :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  said:  The  internal 
Ruler,  heard  of  in  the  divine  and  other  contexts,  is  the  supreme 
Self  and  none  else. 

Why? 

“Because  Its  characteristics  are  spoken  of — the  characteristics 
of  the  supreme  Self  Itself  are  found  mentioned  here.  It  is  the 
characteristic  rulership  of  the  supreme  Self  that  becomes  obvious 
from  the  fact  of  ruling  all  created  things  by  entering  into  the 
earth  and  other  things  differentiated  into  the  divine,  (worldly, 
Vedic),  and  so  on;  for  It  can  reasonably  have  omnipotence  by 
virtue  of  Its  being  the  source  of  all  creation.  And  the  Selfhood 
and  immortality  mentioned  in,  “this  is  the  internal  Ruler,  your 
own  immortal  Self”  (Bf.  III.  vii.  3),  are  justifiable  in  the  case  of 
the  supreme  Self  understood  in  the  primary  sense.  By  referring 
to  the  internal  Ruler  as  being  unknown  to  the  deity  of  the 
earth  in  the  text,  “whom  the  earth  does  not  know”  (ibid.),  it  is 
shown  that  the  internal  Ruler  is  different  from  the  divine  being. 
For  the  deity  of  the  earth  can  know  himself  as  “I  am  the  earth”. 
Similarly,  the  use  of  the  words,  “unseen”,  “unheard”  (Bj\  III. 
vii.  23),  fits  in  with  the  supreme  Self,  It  being  devoid  of  form 
etc.  The  objection  is  not  valid  that  the  supreme  Self  cannot 
possibly  have  any  rulership  owing  to  Its  lack  of  body  and 
organs.  For  It  can  very  well  come  to  own  bodies  and  organs 
owing  to  the  presence  of  these  in  those  whom  It  controls.  On 
this  view  we  do  not  land  into  an  infinite  regress  by  having  to 
assume  a  separate  ruler  for  that  ruler  of  that  individual  being; 
for  there  is  no  difference  (between  the  two).  Infinite  regress  is 
possible  only  if  there  be  a  difference.11 

uThe  question  of  rulership  arises  from  the  point  of  view  of  empirical 
difference.  In  reality  Brahman  is  not  different  from  the  individual,  and 


I.ii.  19] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


135 


II  II 

^  And  not  the  one  mentioned  in  the  Smrti  3RT<R?- 
fi?^rTR[  qualities  not  belonging  to  it  having  been  spoken  of. 

19.  Neither  Pradhana ,  known  from  the  (Samkhya)  Smrti ,  is 
the  internal  Ruler ,  for  qualities  that  do  not  belong  to  Pradhana 
are  spoken  of. 

Opponent :  Perchance  the  qualities  of  being  unseen  etc.  may 
fit  in  with  Pradhana  (primordial  Nature)  as  conceived  of  in 
the  Smrti  of  the  Samkhyas,  for  by  them  that  Pradhana  is 
postulated  to  be  without  form  etc.  They  mention  in  their 
Smrti,  “Beyond  reason,  inscrutable,  and  as  if  in  deep  sleep  every¬ 
where”  (Manu  I.  5).  That  Pradhana  can  even  be  the  ruler, 
since  it  is  the  source  of  all  modifications.  Accordingly,  the  term 
internal  Ruler  denotes  Pradhana.  Although  Pradhana  was 
refuted  under  the  aphorism,  “Because  of  the  attribution  of 
seeing,  the  one  (i.e.  Pradhana  of  the  Sariikhyas)  which  is  not 
taught  in  the  Upani$ad  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe”  (B.  S.  I. 
i.  5),  still  it  forms  the  subject-matter  of  the  doubt  here,  since 
the  qualities  of  not  being  seen  etc.  can  be  imputed  to  it. 

Veddntin :  Therefore  the  answer  is  being  given:  The  Pra¬ 
dhana  of  the  Smrti  cannot  be  meant  by  the  term  internal  Ruler. 

Why? 

“Because  the  qualities  that  do  not  belong  to  Pradhana  are 
spoken  of.”  Although  the  qualities  of  being  unseen  and  so  on 
are  ascribable  to  Pradhana,  not  so  are  the  qualities  of  being  the 
witness  and  so  on;  for  Pradhana  is  admitted  by  them  to  be 
insentient,  while  the  complementary  portion  of  the  text  here 
runs  thus:  “He  is  never  seen,  but  is  the  witness;  He  is  never 
heard,  but  is  the  hearer;  He  is  never  thought,  but  is  the  thinker; 
He  is  never  known,  but  is  the  knower”  (Br.  III.  vii.  23).  Besides, 
Pradhana  can  never  be  the  Self  (as  stated  in,  “your  own  immor¬ 
tal  Self”— ibid.). 

hence  no  question  of  rulership  and  infinite  regress  arises.  Again,  empiri¬ 
cally,  God  is  recognized  as  the  absolute  ruler.  To  assume  another  ruler 
over  Him  is  to  ignore  the  Vedas. 


136  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  19 

Opponent :  If  Pradhana  cannot  be  the  internal  Ruler  owing 
to  the  impossibility  of  its  being  the  Self  and  the  witness,  then 
let  the  individual  soul  be  so;  because  the  embodied  soul  is  a 
conscious  entity,  and  as  such,  it  becomes  the  witness,  hearer, 
thinker,  and  knower.  And  it  is  also  the  Self,  being  the  inmost. 
It  must  be  immortal,  too,  to  make  the  reaping  of  the  fruits  of 
good  and  bad  works  possible.  It  is  also  a  well-known  fact  that 
the  embodied  soul  is  possessed  of  the  characteristics  of  not  being 
seen  and  so  on.  For  it  is  opposed  to  facts  that  the  acts  of 
witnessing  etc.  should  have  as  their  object  the  agent  itself  (of 
witnessing  etc.),  as  shown  in,  “You  cannot  see  that  which  is 
the  witness  of  vision”  (Bj\  III.  iv.  2),  and  other  texts.  And  that 
soul  has  the  capacity  of  controlling  the  assemblage  of  body  and 
senses  from  within;  for  it  is  the  experiencer  (of  the  fruits  of 
its  own  actions).  Thus  the  embodied  soul  is  the  internal  Ruler. 

Vedantin  :  The  answer  to  this  is: 

snfksitvrfcfq-  n  Ro  \\ 

(Not)  STRtT:  the  embodied  soul  ^  also;  for  arfq  both 
read  of  this  one  as  different. 

20.  The  embodied  soul  also  (is  not  the  internal  Ruler);  for 
the  followers  of  both  the  recensions  read  of  this  one  as  differe?it. 

The  word  “not”  has  to  be  supplied  from  the  previous  aphor¬ 
ism.  The  embodied  soul  is  not  intended  as  the  internal  Ruler. 
Why? 

Although  it  is  possible  for  the  embodied  soul  to  be  the  witness 
and  so  on,  still,  being  limited  by  conditioning  factors,  like  space 
in  pot,  it  cannot,  in  the-  fullest  sense,  exist  within  the  earth  etc. 
and  rule  them  from  inside.  Besides,  the  followers  of  both  the 
Kaova  and  Madhyandina  recensions  (of  the  Satapatha  Brah- 
mana)  read  of  the  embodied  soul  as  being  an  entity  different 
from  the  internal  Ruler,  and  as  being  a  habitation  for  and 
an  object  of  control,  like  the  earth,  under  the  internal  Ruler. 
The  Kaijvas  read:  “He  who  inhabits  the  intellect”  (Bf.  III. 
vii.  22);  and  the  Madhyandinas  have:  “He  who  inhabits  the 
atm a”  the  word  atma  standing  as  a  synonym  for  the  embodied 


I.  ii.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  137 

soul.  And  even  in  the  reading,  “He  who  inhabits  the  intellect 
( vijndna.y\  the  word  intellect  means  the  embodied  soul,  which 
is  but  the  entity  identifying  itself  with  the  intellect.  Therefore 
it  stands  established  that  God,  the  internal  Ruler,  is  distinct  from 
the  emobodied  soul. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  there  be  two  witnesses  in  the 
same  body — the  one  that  is  this  God,  the  internal  Ruler,  and 
the  other  that  is  the  embodied  soul? 

Vedantin :  What  incongruity  is  there? 

Opponent :  Since  the  Upani$adic  text,  “There  is  no  other 
witness  but  Him”  (Bj\  III.  vii.  23),  will  stand  contradicted;  for 
in  that  text  it  is  denied  that  any  Self,  other  than  the  internal 
Ruler  under  discussion,  can  be  the  witness,  hearer,  thinker,  or 
knower. 

Objection  :  May  this  not  be  meant  for  the  denial  of  other 
rulers? 

Opponent :  No,  for  no  other  ruler  is  under  consideration,  and 
the  Upani$adic  denial  is  made  without  any  reservation. 

Vedantin  :  With  regard  to  this,  it  is  said:  This  mention  of 
the  distinction  between  the  embodied  soul  and  the  internal 
Ruler  is  based  on  the  limiting  adjunct  of  body  and  senses, 
conjured  up  by  ignorance,  but  this  is  not  so  in  any  real  sense. 
For  the  indwelling  Self  can  be  but  one,  and  not  two.  The 
same  one,  however,  is  mentioned  as  two  owing  to  conditioning 
factors,  as  for  instance  it  is  said,  “the  pot-space”,  “the  cosmic 
space”.  From  this  standpoint,  the  Vedic  texts  about  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  the  knower  and  things  known,  the  means  of 
valid  knowledge  like  perception,  the  experience  of  transmigra¬ 
tion,  and  scriptures  dealing  with  injunctions  and  prohibitions — 
all  become  justifiable.  Thus  it  is  that  the  text,  “Because  when 
there  is  duality,  as  it  were,  then  one  sees  something”  (Bj%  II. 
iv.  14),  shows  that  all  dealings  are  possible  within  the  range  of 
ignorance;  and  the  text,  “But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman 
everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what  should  one  smell 
and  through  what,  what  should  one  see  and  through  what?” 
(ibid.),  precludes  all  dealings  within  the  sphere  of  illumi¬ 
nation. 


138  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  21 

Topic  6:  The  One  that  is  Unseen  etc. 

epTfrfc  II  II 

The  possessor  of  the  attributes  of  invisibility 
etc.  (is  Brahman);  on  account  of  the  characteristics 

having  been  stated. 

21.  The  entity ,  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  not  being  seen 
etc.,  is  Brahman,  for  Its  characteristics  are  spoken  of. 

Doubt :  We  read  in  the  Upani$ad:  “Then  there  is  the  higher 
knowledge  by  which  is  realized  that  Immutable”  (Mu.  I.  i.  5), 
and  “(By  the  higher  knowledge)  the  wise  realize  everywhere 
that  which  cannot  be  perceived  and  grasped;  which  is  without 
source,  features,  eyes,  and  ears;  which  has  neither  hands  nor 
feet;  which  is  eternal,  multiformed,  all-pervasive,  extremely 
subtle,  and  undiminishing;  and  which  is  the  source  of  all”  (Mu. 
I.  i.  6).  With  regard  to  this,  the  doubt  arises:  Is  it  Pradhana, 
or  the  embodied  soul,  or  God  that  is  spoken  of  as  the  material 
cause  of  all  things  and  as  endowed  with  the  qualities  of  not 
being  perceived  etc.? 

Opponent :  Among  these  alternatives,  the  insentient  Pra¬ 
dhana  should  properly  be  the  material  source  of  everything, 
for  the  insentient  things  alone  are  cited  there  by  way  of  illus¬ 
tration:  “As  a  spider  spreads  out  and  withdraws  (its  thread), 
as  on  the  earth  grow  herbs  (and  trees),  and  as  from  a  living 
man  issues  out  hair  on  the  head  and  the  body,  so  out  of  the 
Immutable  does  the  universe  emerge  here  (in  this  phenomenal 
creation)”  (Mu.  I.  i.  7). 

Objection  :  Are  not  the  sentient  spider  and  the  human  being 
taken  here  as  examples? 

Opponent :  We  say,  no;  for  a  sentient  being,  by  itself,  can 
neither  be  the  material  source  of  thread  nor  of  hair.  It  is  rather 
well  known  that  under  the  control  of  the  sentient,  the  insen¬ 
tient  body  of  the  spider  becomes  the  source  of  thread  and  the 
human  body  of  the  hair  on  the  head  and  other  parts.  The 
argument  for  the  non-acceptance  of  Pradhana,  adduced  earlier, 
was  that,  although  Pradhana  could  be  described  as  not  subject 


I.  ii.  21]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  139 

to  visual  perception  etc.,  still  it  could  not  be  spoken  of  as  a 
witness  etc.  (B.  S.  I.  ii.  19).  But  here  (in  this  context),  the 
qualities  of  not  being  perceived  etc.  are  seen  to  be  possible  in 
Pradhana  at  the  same  time  that  no  incompatible  quality  is  in 
evidence. 

Objection  :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  the  expression,  “He  who  is 
omniscient  in  general  and  all-knowing  in  detail”  (Mu.  I.  i.  9), 
heard  in  the  complementary  text,  is  not  applicable  to  the 
insentient  Pradhana?  So  how  is  it  asserted  that  Pradhana  is  the 
source  of  all  things? 

Opponent :  With  regard  to  this,  it  is  said:  It  has  been  shown 
by  the  text,  “That  by  which  is  realized  that  Immutable”  (Alu. 
I.  i.  5),  and  “That  which  cannot  be  perceived”  etc.  (Mu.  I. 
i.  6),  that  the  word  immutable  means  the  source  of  all  things, 
and  it  is  possessed  of  the  quality  of  not  being  perceived  etc. 
Then  at  the  end  it  will  be  said  again,  “Superior  to  the  superior 
immutable”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2).  Now  then,  the  entity  that  is  heard 
of  as  superior  to  the  immutable,  should  be  omniscient  in  general 
and  particular;  and  it  is  Pradhana,  the  material  source  of  all 
things,  that  is  mentioned  by  the  word  immutable.  If,  however, 
the  word  yoni  (source)  means  an  efficient,  and  not  material 
cause,  then  the  embodied  soul  also  can  be  the  source  of  all 
things,  since  it  brings  into  existence  all  the  things  through  its 
merit  and  demerit. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  said:  The  entity 
that  is  the  source  of  all  things  and  is  possessed  of  such 
qualities  as  not  being  perceived  and  so  on  must  be  God  and 
none  else. 

How  is  this  known? 

From  the  mention  of  the  characteristics.  For  the  character¬ 
istics  of  God  are  obviously  mentioned  here  in,  “He  who  is 
omniscient  in  general  and  all-knowing  in  detail”  etc.  (Mu.  I. 
i.  9).  Neither  Pradhana  which  is  insentient,  nor  the  embodied 
soul,  which  is  circumscribed  in  its  vision  by  limiting  adjuncts, 
can  possibly  be  omniscient  in  general  and  all-knowing  in 
detail. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  this  omniscience  in  general 
and  particular  belongs  to  the  one  who  is  higher  than  the  source 


140  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  [I.ii.  21 

of  all  things  (i.e.  Pradhana),  called  the  immutable;  but  that 
omniscience  does  not  belong  to  this  source  of  all? 

With  regard  to  this  the  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  is:  This 
is  not  possible,  since  the  source  of  all  things  that  is  under  dis¬ 
cussion  is  mentioned  as  the  material  cause  of  all  that  is  born, 
in  the  text,  “Out  of  the  Immutable  does  the  universe  emerge 
here”  (Mu.  I.  i.  7);  and  then  the  omniscient  Being  is  mentioned 
immediately  after  as  the  material  cause  of  all  that  is  born,  in 
the  text,  “From  Him  who  is  omniscient  in  general  and  all¬ 
knowing  in  particular  and  whose  austerity  is  constituted  by 
knowledge,  evolves  thus  this  (derivative)  Brahman,  as  well  as 
name,  colour,  and  food”  (Mu.  I.  i.  9).  Accordingly,  since  the 
Immutable  under  discussion,  which  is  the  source  of  all  things, 
is  called  up  to  memory  by  a  similarity  of  reference  (in  the 
second  passage),  it  follows  that  the  characteristics  of  omnis¬ 
cience  in  general  and  detail  are  declared  about  the  Immutable 
Itself.  And  even  in  the  text,  “Superior  to  the  superior  immu¬ 
table”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  none  higher  than  the  Immutable  that  is 
relevant  and  is  the  source  of  all  things  is  referred  to. 

How  is  that  gathered? 

Because  from  the  text,  “That  man  of  enlightenment  should 
adequately  impart  that  knowledge  of  Brahman  by  which  one 
realizes  the  true  and  immutable  Purusa”  (Mu.  I.  ii.  13),  it  can 
be  understood  that  it  is  but  the  Immutable  under  discussion, 
the  source  of  all  things  and  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  not 
being  perceived  and  so  on,  that  is  promised  to  be  presented. 

Why  is  it  then  declared  to  be  “superior  to  the  superior 
immutable”? 

That  we  shall  answer  in  the  succeeding  aphorism.  Moreover, 
it  is  said  here  that  two  kinds  of  knowledge  have  to  be  acquired, 
which  are  the  “higher  and  the  lower”  (Mu.  I.  i.  4).  Of  these, 
the  first  is  mentioned  as  comprising  the  Rg-Veda  etc.,  and  then 
it  is  said,  “Then  there  is  the  higher  knowledge  by  which  is 
realized  the  Immutable”  etc.  (Mu.  I.  i.  5).  There  the  Immutable 
is  heard  of  as  the  subject-matter  of  the  higher  knowledge.  If, 
therefore,  it  be  fancied  that  the  Immutable,  possessed  of  the 
qualities  of  not  being  perceived  etc.,  is  different  from  the 
supreme  Lord,  then  this  will  not  be  the  higher  knowledge. 


L  ii.  21]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  141 

This  division  of  knowledge  into  higher  and  lower  is  made 
according  to  the  two  results,  viz  liberation  and  prosperity. 
Not  that  any  one  can  admit  that  the  knowledge  of  Pradhana 
leads  to  liberation.  In  that  case  three  kinds  of  knowledge 
should  have  been  postulated;  for  from  your  point  of  view,  the 
supreme  Self  is  presented  as  something  different  from  the 
immutable  that  is  the  source  of  all  things.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
however,  it  is  mentioned  here  that  two  kinds  of  knowledge 
have  to  be  acquired.  Moreover,  the  fact  that  it  is  taken  for 
granted  that  the  knowledge  of  all  becomes  included  in  the 
knowledge  of  one,  as  implied  in,  “O  adorable  sir,  which  is  that 
thing,  which  having  been  known,  all  this  becomes  known?” 
(Mu.  I.  i.  3),  can  be  justifiable  only  if  the  all-inclusive  Brahman 
be  the  subject-matter  of  the  talk;  but  this  cannot  be  so  if  the 
subject-matter  be  either  Pradhana  which  comprises  merely  the 
insentient,  or  the  experiencing  soul  that  is  different  from  the 
things  experienced.  Further,  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is 
introduced  as  the  highest  in  the  text,  “To  his  eldest  son, 
Atharva,  he  imparted  that  knowledge  of  Brahman  that  is  the 
basis  of  all  knowledge”  (Mu.  I.  i.  1),  then  making  a  division 
between  the  higher  and  lower  knowledge,  it  is  shown  that  the 
higher  knowledge  leads  to  the  realization  of  the  Immutable; 
and  from  this  it  becomes  revealed  that  this  higher  knowledge  is 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman.  This  knowledge  that  is  called  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  will  be  wrongly  called  so  if  the  Immu¬ 
table  to  be  attained  through  it  becomes  different  from  Brahman. 
And  since  there  are  such  declamations  as,  “Since  these  eighteen 
constituents  of  a  sacrifice,12  on  whom  the  inferior  karma  has 
been  said  to  rest,  are  perishable  because  of  their  fragility, 
therefore  those  ignorant  people  who  get  elated  with  the  idea, 
‘This  is  the  cause  of  bliss’,  undergo  old  age  and  death  over  and 
over  again”  (Mu.  I.  ii.  7),  it  follows  that  the  knowledge  of 
karma ,  comprised  in  the  Rg-Veda  etc.,  is  presented  at  the 
commencement  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  for  the  sake  of 
eulogizing  the  latter.  And  after  decrying  the  lower  knowledge 
it  is  said  that  those  alone  have  the  competence  for  the  higher 


“Sixteen  priests,  the  sacrificer,  and  his  wife. 


142  BRAHMA  -SCTR A  -BHA$YA  [I.  ii.  21 

knowledge  who  turn  back  from  the  former:  “A  Brahmaija 
should  resort  to  renunciation  after  examining  the  acquired 
worlds  with  the  help  of  the  idea,  ‘There  is  nothing  here 
that  is  not  a  result  of  karma\  so  what  is  the  need  of  karmaV 
For  knowing  the  Reality  he  should  go  with  sacrificial  fagot  in 
hand  to  a  teacher  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  absorbed  in  Brahman” 
(Mu.  I.  ii.  12). 

It  was  also  argued  that  since  the  insentient  earth  and  other 
things  were  cited  as  examples,  therefore  the  source  of  all  things, 
for  whose  sake  these  illustrations  are  presented,  must  be  insen¬ 
tient  as  well.  But  that  is  wrong,  for  there  is  no  such  rule  that 
the  illustration  and  the  thing  illustrated  must  be  absolutely 
similar.  Moreover,  just  because  the  gross  earth  and  other  things 
are  cited  by  way  of  example,  it  does  not  follow,  even  according 
to  you,  that  the  source  of  all  things,  that  is  exemplified,  is 
postulated  to  be  gross.  Therefore  the  source  of  all  things,  that 
is  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  not  being  perceived  and  so  on, 
must  be  God. 

^  ii  ^  II 

^  And  on  account  of  the  mention  of 

distinctive  characteristics  and  difference  the  other  two 

q-  are  not. 

22.  And  the  other  two  (viz  the  individual  soul  and  Pradhana) 
are  not  meant ,  for  there  is  the  mention  of  the  distinctive 
characteristics  (of  Brahman)  and  (Its)  difference  (from  the 
two). 

For  this  further  reason,  God  alone  is  the  source  of  all  things; 
and  neither  Pradhana  nor  the  individual  soul  is  so. 

Why? 

“Because  of  the  mention  of  distinctive  characteristics  and 
difference.”  For  on  the  strength  of  dissimilar  characteristics,  the 
source  of  all  things,  which  is  relevant  to  the  context,  has  been 
distinguished  from  the  embodied  soul  in  the  text,  “Purusa  is 
transcendental,  since  He  is  formless;  and  since  He  is  coextensive 
with  all  that  is  external  and  internal,  and  since  He  is  birthless, 


I.  ii.  22]  BRAHMA  -  SGTRA  -  BHA§YA  143 

therefore  He  is  without  vital  force  and  without  mind.  He  is 
pure  and  superior  to  the  (other)  superior  immutable”  (Mu.  II. 
i.  2).  These  characteristics  of  transcendence  etc.  cannot  logically 
apply  to  the  embodied  soul  which  identifies  itself  with  the 
limitations  imposed  by  name  and  form,  conjured  up  by  igno¬ 
rance,  and  which  imagines  their  attributes  as  its  own.  Hence 
Puru$a  (the  conscious  all-pervasive  entity),  met  with  in  the 
Upani$ads  alone,  is  directly  mentioned  here.  Similarly  the  source 
of  all  things,  which  is  relevant  to  the  context,  is  mentioned  as 
different  from  Pradhana  in  the  text,  “Superior  to  the  superior 
immutable”  ((ibid.).  The  immutable  is  the  unmanifested  (i.e. 
beginningless  Maya)  that  is  a  kind  of  power  belonging  to  the 
source  of  name  and  form  (viz  God),  that  is  the  latent  state 
of  all  the  elements,  that  has  God  as  its  support,  that  is  a  limiting 
adjunct  to  God  Himself,13  and  that  is  higher  than  all  its  own 
modifications,  but  is  itself  unmodified.  By  declaring  a  difference 
through  the  statement,  “superior  to  that  superior  (immutable) 
Maya”,  the  text  shows  that  what  is  intended  here  to  be  spoken 
of  is  the  supreme  Self.  It  is  not  a  fact  that  any  independent 
principle,  called  Pradhana,  is  admitted,  and  then  a  difference 
from  it  is  shown  here  (in  the  aphorism). 

What  is  admitted  then? 

(It  is  held  that)  if  a  principle,  called  Pradhana  (meaning  Maya 
or  nescience),  be  imagined,  and  it  be  asserted  without  any 
violence  to  the  Upani$ads  that  this  Pradhana  is  called  by  such 
terms  as  the  “unmanifested”  and  the  “latent  state  of  all  the 
elements”,  then  you  may  as  well  follow  that  imagination.14  The 
Upani$ad  mentions  a  difference  (of  Immutable)  from  that. 
And  so  it  is  established  here  that  God  is  the  source  of  all 
things. 

For  what  further  reason  is  God  the  source  of  all  things? 

53  Making  a  difference  between  God  and  the  creatures. 

14  For  thereby  you  speak  of  Maya  only,  though  under  another  name, 
Pradhana,  which  term  may  bear  the  etymological  sense  of  “that  which 
is  perceived  as  the  products”.  Even  if  the  opponent  should  say  that  the 
aphorist  refutes  this  very  Pradhana,  and  not  the  Pradhana  of  the 
Sarhkhyas,  still  there  is  nothing  to  quarrel  about,  for  the  Samkhya  view 
stands  negated  along  with  that. 


144  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.ii.25 

II  ^  II 

^  And  owing  to  a  presentation  of  form. 

23.  And  because'  there  is  a.  presentation  of  form. 

Moreover,  immediately  after  the  text,  “Superior  to  the  superior 
immutable”,  the  creation  of  the  entities,  counting  from  the 
vital  force  to  the  earth,  is  spoken  of  in  the  verse,  “From  Him 
originates  the  vital  force”  etc.  (Mu.  II.  i.  3).  And  after  that 
we  notice  that  the  form  of  that  very  source  of  all  things,  com¬ 
prising  within  it  all  creation,  is  presented  in  the  verse,  “The 
indwelling  Self  of  all  is  surely  He  of  whom  heaven  is  the  head, 
the  moon  and  the  sun  are  the  two  eyes,  the  directions  are  the 
two  ears,  the  revealed  Vedas  are  speech,  air  is  the  vital  force, 
the  universe  is  the  heart,  and  it  is  He  from  whose  two  feet 
emerged  the  earth”  (Mu.  II.  i.  4).  All  that  is  appropriate  for 
God  alone,  He  being  the  source  of  all  creation.  Such  a  presen¬ 
tation  of  form  is  incompatible  with  the  embodied  soul  for  its 
greatness  is  limited;  and  this  is  incompatible  with  Pradhana 
which  cannot  be  the  indwelling  Self  of  all  beings.  Therefore 
it  is  understood  that  God  alone  is  the  source  of  all  things  but 
not  so  are  the  other  two. 

How  is  it  again  known  that  this  is  a  presentation  of  the  form 
of  the  source  of  all  things? 

Because  of  the  context,  and  because  the  words  “it  is  He” 
(ibid.)  allude  to  something  under  consideration.  When  after 
broaching  the  topic  of  the  source  of  all  things,  statements  such 
as  these  are  made,  “From  Him  originates  the  vital  force”  etc. 
(Mu.  II.  i.  3),  “The  indwelling  Self  of  all  is  surely  He”  (Mu. 
II.  i.  4),  these  must  relate  to  the  source  of  all  things.  For  instance, 
if  after  starting  a  talk  about  a  teacher,  some  one  should  say, 
“Read  under  him.  He  is  versed  in  the  Vedas  and  the  ancillary 
subjects”,  then  that  statement  relates  to  that  teacher.  The  case 
is  similar  here. 

Opponent :  How  can  the  source  of  all  things,  that  is  possessed 
of  the  qualities  of  not  being  seen  etc.,  have  a  physical  form? 

Vedantin  :  That  creates  no  difficulty;  for  the  statement  has 
in  view  the  revelation  of  all-pervasiveness  and  not  any  physical 


I.  ii.  23]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  145 

form,  just  as  it  is  the  case  in,  “I  am  food,  I  am  the  eater  of 
food”  (Tai.  III.  x.  6). 

Others  (viz  the  Vrttikara ),  again,  think:  This  is  not  a  presen¬ 
tation  of  the  source  of  all  things,  for  the  presentation  is  made 
through  the  fact  of  getting  born.  In  the  earlier  verse,  “From 
this  One  originates  the  vital  force,  as  well  as  the  mind  and  all 
the  senses,  space,  air,  fire,  water,  and  the  earth  that  supports 
everything”15  (Mu.  II.  i.  3),  all  the  entities,  counting  from  the 
vital  force  to  the  earth,  were  presented  from  the  standpoint 
of  being  born.  Later  on,  too,  the  verses  starting  with,  “From 
Him  emerges  the  fire  (i.e.  heaven)  of  which  the  sun  is  the 
fuel”  (Mu.  II.  i.  5),  and  ending  with,  “From  Him  issue  all  the 
corns  as  well  as  the  juices”  etc.  (Mu.  II.  i.  9),  speak  only  of 
things  being  born.  In  the  midst  of  all  this,  how  can  the  form 
of  the  source  of  all  things  be  presented  here  alone  all  of  a 
sudden?  The  all-pervasiveness  too  will  be  taught,  after  finishing 
with  creation,  in  the  verse,  “Puru§a  alone  is  all  this — comprising 
the  karma  and  knowledge”  (Mu.  II.  i.  10).  In  the  Vedas  and 
the  Smrtis  too  we  notice  statements  about  the  birth  etc.  of  the 
Being  who  has  the  three  worlds  as  His  body;  “Hiranyagarbha 
was  born  first,  and  having  been  born,  He  became  the  only  Lord 
of  all  beings.  He  held  the  earth  and  this  heaven.  That  single 
Deity  we  propitiate  with  oblation”  (R.  V.  X.  cxxi.  1).  The 
word  samavartata  in  that  text  means  “was  bom”.  So  also  in 
the  text,  “He  is  the  first  embodied  Being,  He  is  called  Puru$a, 
He  is  the  first  ordainer  of  all  beings.  Thus  was  Brahma  born 
in  the  beginning”.  Even  a  created  person  (viz  Hiranyagarbha) 
can  be  all-pervasive,  for  in  His  aspect  as  the  vital  force,  He 
dwells  within  the  bodies  of  all  beings. 

If  this  point  of  view  be  accepted,  then  the  explanation  (of 
the  aphorism)  will  be  this:  All  the  presentations  of  form  in  such 
texts  as,  “Puru$a  is  all  this”  (Mu.  II.  i.  10),  lead  to  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  supreme  Lord.16 

“The  text  implies  that  the  all-comprehensive  Hiranyagarbha,  mentioned 
in,  “The  indwelling  Self  of  all”  (Mu.  II.  i.  4),  emerges  from  Him  who  is 
the  source  of  all  things  (Mu.  II.  i.  3).  So  Hiranyagarbha  has  birth  just 
like  any  other  thing. 

“The  assertion,  “all  karma  and  knowledge  (i.e.  meditation)  are  but 
10 


14<5 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 
Topic  7:  Vaisvanara 


[I.  ii.  24 


II  II 

^^cfpR:  VaiSvanara  for  the  words  denoting 

many  things  are  used  specifically. 

24.  Vaisvanara  (the  Cosmic  Person)  is  the  supreme  Lord,  for 
though  the  (two)  words  (Self  and  Vaisvanara)  denote  many 
things,  they  are  used  specifically. 

Doubt :  (In  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad)  the  start  is  made  thus: 
“Which  is  our  Self  and  what  is  Brahman?”17  (V.  xi.  1)  and 
“At  present  you  remember  this  Self,  the  Vaisvanara.  Tell  us 
of  that  very  entity”18  (V.  xi.  6).  Then  after  the  denunciation 
(by  ASvapati)  of  the  separate  meditation  on  heaven,  sun,  air, 
space,  water,  earth,  as  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  bright  light, 
(multiform,  identity  with  divergent  paths,  vastness,  wealth, 
support),  and  after  the  teaching  (by  Asvapati)  that  these  con¬ 
stitute  the  head,  (eye,  life,  middle  part  of  the  body,  bladder, 
and  feet)  of  Vaisvanara,  the  text  runs  thus:  “He  who  meditates 
on  this  Vaisvanara  Self,  knowing  It  directly  as  prddefamatra 
(spatially  limited,  or  realized  in  limited  places)  and  abhivimdna 
(identified  with  oneself),  eats  food  in  all  the  worlds,  through  all 
the  beings  and  through  all  the  seifs.  Of  this  VaiSviinara  Self, 
the  head  is  heaven,  the  eye  is  the  sun,  the  vital  force  is  air,  the 
middle  part  of  the  body  is  space,  the  bladder  is  water,  the  earth 
is  the  two  feet,  the  chest  is  the  sacrificial  altar,  the  heart  is  the 
Garhapatya  fire,  the  mind  is  the  Anvaharyapacana  fire,  and 
the  mouth  is  the  Ahavanlya  fire”  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  1-2).  The  doubt 

Purusa”  amounts  to  presenting  an  entity  inherent  in  everything.  And  so 
the  text  leads  to  the  comprehension  of  the  supreme  Lord  as  the  source 
of  all  things. 

17  Five  Brahmanas — Praclnasala,  Satyayajna,  Indradyumna,  Jana,  Budila— 
discussed  this  problem  among  themselves.  As  they  found  no  adequate 
answer,  they  went  to  Uddalaka,  who  also  did  not  know  the  full  answer. 

“The  six  Brahmanas  went  to  king  Asvapati  and  said  this  to  him.  In 
answer  to  the  king’s  question,  the  Brahmanas  related  their  own  concep¬ 
tions  of  Vaisvanara,  as  stated  below  seriatim. 


I.ii.24]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  147 

arises  here  as  to  what  is  indicated  by  the  word  VaiSvanara.  Is 
it  the  heat  in  the  stomach,  or  the  element  fire,  or  the  deity 
identifying  himself  with  it,  or  the  embodied  soul,  or  the  supreme 
Lord? 

What,  again,  causes  the  doubt  here? 

The  cause  is  the  use  of  the  word  VaiSvanara,  which  is  a  com¬ 
mon  term  for  the  heat  in  the  stomach,  the  element  called  fire, 
and  the  deity  of  fire,  as  also  the  use  of  the  word  Self  denoting 
both  the  embodied  Self  and  the  supreme  Lord.  So  the  doubt 
arises  as  to  which  of  these  meanings  should  be  accepted  and 
which  rejected.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  here? 

Opponent :  It  is  the  fire  in  the  stomach. 

Why? 

Because  the  word  is  seen  to  be  used  sometimes  specifically  to 
signify  this  fire,  as  in,  “This  fire  that  is  within  a  man  and 
digests  the  food  is  Vaisvanara”  (Bj\  V.  ix),  and  such  other 
places.  Or  it  may  mean  simply  the  ordinary  fire,  for  it  is  seen 
to  be  used  in  a  general  way  also,  as  in,  “For  the  sake  of  the 
whole  universe  the  gods  created  that  Vaisvanara  (fire,  i.e.  the 
sun)”  (R.  V.  X.  lxxxviii.  12).  Or  it  may  mean  the  deity  having 
fire  as  his  body,  the  word  being  in  use  in  that  sense  also: 
“Because  Vaisvanara,  the  king  of  the  worlds,  ordains  happiness, 
and  because  all  glories  belong  to  him,  therefore  may  we  remain 
within  his  favour”  (R.  V.  I.  iic.  1);  for  according  to  this  and 
other  texts  of  this  kind,  the  word  can  apply  to  some  deity 
possessed  of  glory  etc.  If,  however,  it  is  held  that  the  word 
Vaisvanara  is  to  be  interpreted  in  consonance  with  the  word 
Self,  as  the  word  Self  alone  is  used  in  the  beginning  in  the 
text,  “Which  is  our  Self,  what  is  Brahman?”  (Ch.  V.  xi.  1), 
still  it  must  be  merely  the  embodied  soul,  because  it  approxi¬ 
mates  to  Vaisvanara  by  reason  of  being  an  experiencer,  and 
because  the  attribute  of  spatial  limitation  is  possible  in  its  case, 
it  being  limited  by  conditioning  factors.  Therefore  Vaisvanara 
is  not  God. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  said:  Vaisvanara 
should  properly  mean  God. 

Why? 

Because  even  though  the  two  words  (Vaisvanara  and  Self) 


148  BRAHMA -S0TRA-BHA5YA  [I.ii.24 

denote  many  things,  they  are  used  specifically.  Sadhar  ana-sab  da- 
vite$a  means  specification  about  the  two  common  words. 
Although  both  these  words — Self,  Vaisvanara — are  common  to 
many  things — Vaisvanara  implying  three  things  and  Self  two — 
yet  a  specification  is  noticed,  because  of  which  their  meaning 
is  understood  to  be  the  supreme  Lord,  as  is  seen  in:  “Of  this 
VaiSvanara  Self,  the  head  is  heaven”  etc.  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  2). 
Here  we  understand  that  the  supreme  Self  Itself,  which  has 
assumed  a  special  form  with  heaven  etc.  as  the  head  and  so 
on,  is  presented  as  the  indwelling  Self,  for  the  sake  of  medita¬ 
tion.  And  this  can  be  so,  for  It  is  the  cause.  From  the  fact  that 
all  the  states  of  an  effect  belong  to  the  cause,  it  follows  that 
the  supreme  Lord  can  have  heaven  etc.  as  His  limbs.  And  the 
result,  viz  subsisting  in  all  the  worlds  etc.  as  heard  of  in  the 
text,  “He  (the  knower  of  VaiSvanara)  eats  food  in  all  the 
worlds,  among  all  beings,  and  through  all  the  seifs”  (Ch.  V. 
xviii.  1),  is  possible  if  the  ultimate  cause  is  meant.  And  the 
indication  of  Brahman,  contained  in  the  text,  “Thus  indeed 
are  all  his  sins  burnt  away”  (Ch.  V.  xxiv.  3),  which  speaks  of 
the  burning  away  of  all  the  sins  of  the  knower  of  VaiSvanara, 
and  the  indication  in  the  commencement,  as  contained  in  the 
words  Self  and  Brahman  in  the  text,  “Which  is  our  Self,  what 
is  Brahman?”  (Ch.  V.  xi.  1),  lead  us  to  the  comprehension  of 
the  supreme  Lord  alone.  Hence  the  supreme  Lord  alone  is 
meant  by  Vaisvanara. 

snfefa  a  n  ii 

that  (form)  mentioned  in  the  Smj*ti  ^7^  should  be 
aryfHH  an  indicatory  mark;  5%  hence. 

25.  The  form  referred  to  in  the  Smrti  is  an  indicatory  mark 
(that  Vaisvanara  means  the  supreme  Lord).  Hence  Vaisvanara 
is  God. 

Another  reason  why  God  is  meant  by  Vaisvanara  is  that  the 
Sm|ti  mentions  that  the  form,  comprising  the  three  worlds  and 
having  fire  as  the  mouth,  heaven  as  the  head,  and  so  on,  belongs 
to  God  Himself:  “Salutation  to  Him  who  is  embodied  in  the 


I.  ii.  26]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  149 

three  worlds  with  fire  as  His  mouth,  heaven  as  His  head,  sky  as 
the  navel,  the  earth  as  the  two  feet,  the  sun  as  the  eye,  and  the 
directions  as  the  ears”  (Mbh.  XII.  47.  68).  This  form,  mentioned  in 
the  Smrti,  bears  witness  to  the  Vedic  text  forming  its  basis; 
and  thus  it  becomes  a  ground  for  inferring  that  the  (Vedic) 
word  VaiSvanara  stands  for  the  supreme  Lord.  The  word  iti  is 
used  in  the  sense  of  “hence”,  implying  thereby,  “Since  this  is 
a  ground  of  inference  leading  to  that  conclusion,  therefore 
Vaisvanara  means  the  supreme  Self  Itself’.  Though  “salutation 
to  Him  who  is  embodied  in  the  three  worlds”  is  a  eulogy, 
still  a  eulogy,  involving  the  presentation  of  such  a  form,  is 
not  quite  possible  unless  there  is  some  Vedic  text  forming  its 
basis.  Other  Smrti  texts  like  the  following  can  also  be  quoted 
here:  “His  nature  is  inscrutable  and  He  is  the  creator  of  all 
beings,  of  whom,  the  Brahmans  say,  that  heaven  is  the  head, 
sky  is  the  navel,  the  sun  and  moon  are  the  eyes,  the  directions 
are  to  be  known  as  the  ears,  and  the  earth  constitutes  the  two 
feet.” 

HI  ^fcT  ^  ^TT 

H  II 

Because  of  the  word  and  other  factors  xT  srfdgHT^ 
and  because  of  residence  inside,  tf  not  so,  ^  if  this  be 
the  objection,  then  q*  not  so,  because  the  instruction 

is  to  conceive  in  that  way  because  it  is  inappli¬ 
cable  (elsewhere)  ^  and  they  mention  ippj  this  one 

arfq  even  as  a  Puru§a  (lit  person). 

26.  If  it  be  objected  that  Vaisvanara  is  not  the  supreme  Self 
because  of  the  word  used  as  well  as  other  factors ,  and  because 
of  residence  inside ,  then  we  say  :  not  so,  because  the  instruction 
is  to  conceive  of  Brahman  as  such ,  because  the  specification  is 
inapplicable  to  others,  and  because  they  mention  Him  even  as  a 
person  (Purusa). 

The  opponent  says  here  that  the  supreme  Lord  cannot  be . 
Vaisvanara. 

Why? 


150  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  ii.  26 

Because  of  the  word  used  as  well  as  other  factors,  and 
because  of  residence  inside.  To  take  up  the  “word”  first:  The 
term  Vaisvanara  cannot  possibly  be  used  for  the  supreme  Lord, 
for  its  conventional  meaning  is  something  else.  So  also  the 
word  fire,  as  in  “This  fire  that  is  such  is  Vaisvanara”  (S.  B.  X. 
vi.  1.12),  is  not  applicable  to  the  supreme  Self.  By  the  term 
“other  factors”  is  to  be  understood  the  conception  with  regard 
to  the  three  fires  contained  in,  “The  heart  is  the  Garhapatya 
fire”  etc.  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  2),  as  well  as  the  mention  of  fire  as 
the  place  for  the  oblation  to  Prana,  (conceived  of  as  the  fire  in 
Agnihotra),  in  the  text,  “Now  then  the  food  that  comes  first  is 
to  be  offered  as  an  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  xix.  1).  For  these  reasons, 
the  meaning  of  the  word  Vaisvanara  is  to  be  understood  as  the 
fire  in  the  stomach.  So  also  we  hear  of  residence  inside,  “He 
who  knows  this  (this  fire  called  Vaisvanara)  as  Puru$a  (Person), 
as  having  the  likeness  of  Puru$a,  and  as  residing  inside  Puru$a 
(eats  food  everywhere)”  (§.  B.  X.  vi.  1.11).  That  is  possible 
for  the  fire  in  the  stomach.  As  for  the  argument  that  because 
of  the  specification  mentioned  in  “Heaven  is  the  head”  etc. 
(Ch.  V.  xviii  2),  Vaisvanara19  must  be  the  supreme  Self,  we 
ask,  “In  the  face  of  the  specifications  supporting  either  point  of 
view,  how  do  you  arrive  at  the  decision  that  the  specification 
about  the  supreme  Lord  alone  is  to  be  accepted  and  not  the 
other  about  the  fire  in  the  stomach?”  Or  it  may  be  that  there  is 
a  reference  to  the  element  fire,  existing  inside  and  outside.  For 
from  the  mantra  texts,  such  as  the  following,  wc  can  gather 
that  it  too  has  a  relationship  with  heaven  etc.:  “(That  is  to 
be  meditated  on)  which,  in  the  form  of  the  sun,  pervades  this 
earth  and  heaven  and  the  inter-space  between  heaven  and 
earth”  (R.  V.  X.  lxxxviii.  3).  Or  the  deity,  having  fire  as  his 
body  can  have  heaven  etc.  as  his  limbs  by  virtue  of  the  divinity 
he  is  dowered  with.  Therefore  Vaisvanara  docs  not  mean  the 
supreme  Lord  here. 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  say:  No,  for  the  instruction  is  about 
conceiving  in  that  way.  From  such  reasons  as  the  “use  of  the 
word”  and  so  on,  the  supreme  Lord  should  not  be  denied. 

10  Meaning  “the  entity  filling  up  everything,  present  everywhere,  and 
Consciousness  by  nature”. 


I.  ii.  26] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


151 


Why? 

Because  the  instruction  is  about  imagining  (Vaisvanara)  in 
that  way  without  abandoning  (its  meaning  as)  the  fire  in  the 
stomach,  inasmuch  as  the  superimposition  of  the  idea  of  the 
supreme  Self  on  the  Vaisvanara  fire  in  the  stomach  is  taught 
here  just  as  in,  “Meditate  on  the  mind  as  Brahman”  (Ch.  III. 
xviii.  1).  Or  the  supreme  Self  is  taught  here  to  be  meditated 
on  as  conditioned  by  the  limiting  adjunct  of  the  Vaisvanara  fire 
in  the  stomach,  just  as  it  is  done  in  such  texts  as,  “identified 
with  the  mind,  having  the  vital  force  as  His  body,  having 
effulgence  as  His  form”  etc.20  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2).  If  the  supreme 
Self  be  not  implied  here  and  the  mere  fire  in  the  stomach  be 
meant,  then  the  specification  in  the  text,  “Heaven  is  the  head” 
etc.  will  surely  be  impossible.  We  shall  explain  under  the  suc¬ 
ceeding  aphorism  how  this  specification  cannot  be  justified  even 
by  resorting  to  a  deity  or  the  element  fire.  If  the  mere  fire  in 
the  stomach  be  meant,  it  can  only  have  its  residence  within 
Puru$a,  but  it  cannot  be  Purusa  himself.  The  followers  of  the 
Vajasaneya  recension,  however,  read  of  this  Vaisvanara  as 
Puru$a  himself  in,  “He  who  is  Puru§a  is  this  fire  called  Vais¬ 
vanara.  He  who  knows  this  fire  called  Vaisvanara  as  Puru$a, 
having  the  likeness  of  Purusa,  and  residing  inside  Puru$a’  (S.  B. 
X.  vi.  1.11).  But  since  the  supreme  Self  is  the  Self  of  all,  It  can 
very  well  be  both  Puru$a  and  have  residence  within  Puru$a. 

For  those  who  read  this  portion  of  the  aphorism  thus, 
“ purusavidhamapi  ca  enamadhiyate — for  they  read  of  Him  as 
having  the  likeness  of  Purusa  as  well”,  the  meaning  is  this:  On 
the  assumption  that  the  mere  fire  in  the  stomach  is  meant,  it 
can  simply  have  residence  within  Puru$a,  but  it  cannot  have 
the  likeness  of  Purusa.  But  the  followers  of  the  Vajasaneya 
recesion  read  of  this  One  as  having  the  likeness  of  Puru$a  as 
well,  in  the  text,  ‘Know  Him  as  having  the  likeness  of  Puru$a 
and  residing  inside  Purusa’  ”.  And  by  the  term  “the  likeness 
of  Puru$a”  is  to  be  understood,  in  accordance  with  the  topic 
under  discussion,  all  the  limbs  counting  from  heaven  as  the 
head  to  the  earth  as  the  feet  in  His  divine  aspect,  and  the 

"In  the  first  case,  fire  is  a  symbol,  in  the  second  it  is  a  limiting  adjunct. 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


152 


[I.ii.  26 


well-known  human  limbs  counting  from  the  head  to  the  chin 
in  His  corporeal  aspect. 


3?cf  *  ^RTT  =3  II  ^V9  II 

8RT:  For  these  very  reasons  q-  not  a  deity  ^  and 

not  any  element. 


27.  For  these  very  reasons  (V  aisvanara  is)  neither  the  deity 
nor  the  element. 

And  it  was  asserted  that  from  the  presentation  of  the  element 
fire  in  association  with  heaven  and  the  rest  in  the  text  of  the 
mantra,  it  follows  that  the  conception  of  the  limbs,  as  con¬ 
tained  in,  “The  head  itself  is  fire”  etc.  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  1)  must 
be  made  about  that  very  element  fire;  or  the  conception  of 
limbs  has  to  be  made  about  the  deity  that  has  fire  as  his  body, 
for  the  deity  is  dowered  with  divinity.  That  has  to  be  repu¬ 
diated.  So  it  is  said  here:  For  these  very  reasons,  the  deity  (of 
fire)  is  not  Vaisvanara.  The  element  fire  is  also  not  so,  for  the 
element  fire  that  has  the  nature  of  mere  heat  and  light  cannot 
be  fancied  to  have  heaven  as  its  head  and  so  on,  for  a  thing 
that  is  itself  a  product  cannot  be  the  Self  of  another  product. 
So  also  the  deity,  possessed  though  he  is  of  divinity,  cannot  be 
fancied  to  have  heaven  etc.  as  his  head  etc.,  for  the  deity  is 
not  their  source,  and  his  divinity  depends  on  the  supreme  Lord. 
Besides,  the  inapplicability  of  the  word  Self  is  there  to  be  sure 
in  all  the  alternatives. 


drfofa:  Jaimini  (thinks)  non-contradiction  3rfr 

even  if  directly  (meditated). 

28.  According  to  Jaimini ,  there  is  no  contradiction  even  in 
case  of  direct  meditation. 

In  conformity  with  the  mention  of  residence  inside  and  so 
on,  it  was  stated  earlier  that  the  supreme  Lord  is  to  be  meditated 
upon  with  the  help  of  fire  in  the  stomach  as  His  symbol  or  He 


I.ii.28] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


153 


is  to  be  meditated  upon  as  conditioned  by  the  fire  in  the 
stomach.  But  now  the  teacher  Jaimini  thinks  that  even  if  the 
supreme  Lord  (in  His  cosmic  form  of  Virat  be  understood  by 
the  word  Vai£vanara  and)  be  accepted  directly  for  meditation21 
without  thinking  of  fire  as  a  symbol  or  limiting  adjunct,  still 
there  will  be  no  contradiction. 

Opponent :  Will  not  the  statement  about  residence  inside  and 
“the  use  of  the  word”  and  other  reasons  mentioned  in  the  earlier 
aphorism  (26)  be  contradicted  if  the  fire  in  the  stomach  be  not 
accepted  as  the  meaning  of  the  word  VaiSvanara? 

Vedantm :  As  to  this,  it  is  said:  Of  these,  the  statement  about 
residence  inside  is  not  contradicted.  For  it  is  not  a  fact  that 
the  statement,  “He  who  knows  this  (VaiSvanara)  as  Puru$a, 
having  the  likeness  of  Puru$a,  and  residing  inside  Puru$a”  (S.  B. 
X.  vi.  1.11),  is  made  with  reference  to  the  fire  in  the  stomach; 
for  that  fire  is  neither  under  consideration  nor  is  it  mentioned 
by  name. 

What  is  the  meaning  then? 

The  subject  under  discussion  is  the  conception  of  the  likeness 
of  Puru$a,  so  far  as  the  limbs  counting  from  the  head  to  the 
chin  are  concerned.  And  the  statement,  “He  who  knows  this 
One  having  the  likeness  of  Puru$a”,  is  made  with  reference  to 
that  conception.  This  is  just  like  the  statement,  “He  sees  the 
branch  fixed  on  the  tree”.22  Or  the  statement,  “He  who  knows 
the  One  having  the  likeness  of  Puru$a  and  residing  in  Puru$a”, 
is  made  with  a  view  to  presenting  the  nature  of  the  pure  witness 
that  belongs  to  the  supreme  Self  under  consideration.  This  Self 
has  the  likeness  of  Puru$a  since  Puru$a  is  Its  limiting  adjunct 
in  the  bodily  and  divine  contexts.28  Once  the  supreme  Lord  is 


81  The  word  Vaisvanara  stands  for  Brahman,  and  does  not  mean  the 
ordinary  fire  at  all  (see  f.n.  19). 

“The  limbs  of  Purusa  are  said  to  be  in  Purusa,  though  the  limbs 
constitute  His  body  and  are  not  separate  from  it.  Since  God  is  super¬ 
imposed  on  the  limbs  of  Purusa,  His  conformity  to  Puru§a’s  limbs  amounts 
to  His  residence  inside  Purusa. 

“Divine — counting  from  heaven  to  the  earth;  bodily — counting  from 
the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  chin.  God  is  inside  all,  in  the  sense  of 
being  their  witness. 


154  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.ii.28 

accepted  as  the  meaning  of  the  text  after  a  consideration  of 
it  in  a  logical  order  from  beginning  to  end,  the  word  VaiSva- 
nara  must  signify  Him  alone  through  some  derivative  (and  not 
conventional)  sense.  Vai£vanara  is  the  supreme  Self  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  these  derivations:  He  who  is  the  cosmos  (visva)  as 
well  as  a  person  (nara) ;  or  He  who  is  the  ordainer  (nara)  of 
the  universe  (visva) ;  or  He  to  whom  belong  all  (visva)  beings 
(nara).  He  is  the  supreme  Self,  for  He  is  the  Self  of  all.  Vai§- 
vanara  is  the  same  as  Visvanara,  the  suffix  (bringing  about  the 
transformation)  signifies  nothing  but  the  original  word  itself, 
as  in  the  words  rak$asa  and  vayasa ,24  Even  the  word  agni 
(usually  meaning  fire),  should  mean  the  supreme  Self  from  the 
derivative  sense  of  leading  to  the  attainment  of  the  results  of 
work.26  And  since  the  supreme  Self  is  the  Self  of  all,  it  is  quite 
reasonable  to  think  of  It  as  the  Garhapatya  fire  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  2), 
or  as  the  place  (i.e.  fire)  for  offering  the  oblations  to  the  vital 
force  (Ch.  V.  xix.  1). 

Opponent :  On  the  supposition  that  VaiSvanara  stands  for 
the  supreme  Self,  how  can  the  text  about  spatial  limitation 
(prddesamdtratva)  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  1)  be  justified? 

Vedantin :  The  next  aphorism  proceeds  to  explain  this: 

grfiToEHF:  From  the  point  of  view  of  manifestation  this 
is  (what)  3TPFR«T:  Asmarathya  (says). 

29.  According  to  Asmarathyay  it  is  from  the  point  of  view  of 
manifestation  (that  God  is  referred  to  as  spatially  limited). 

Even  though  the  supreme  Lord  transcends  all  limitation,  still 
there  can  be  a  spatial  limitation  for  the  sake  of  (His)  manifesta¬ 
tion.  For  the  supreme  Lord  does  become  manifest  (in  His 
majesty)  out  of  favour  for  His  worshippers.  Or  because  He 
becomes  specially  manifest  in  particular  spots  like  the  heart, 

MRaksas  and  Raksasa  both  mean  demon;  vayas  and  vayasa  both  mean 
crow. 

“Or  that  which  makes  the  world  attain  birth;  or  that  which  goes 
everywhere,  or  knows  everything. 


I.  ii.  31]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  155 

which  are  the  places  (pradeia)  for  His  revelation,  therefore 
from  the  point  of  view  of  manifestation,  the  text  about  spatial 
limitatioh  is  justifiable  even  in  the  case  of  the  supreme  Lord. 
This  is  how  the  teacher  Asmarathya  thinks. 

II  30  || 

On  account  of  being  meditated  on,  (says)  Badari. 

30.  According  to  Badari  (God  is  spoken  of  as  spatially  limited) 
on  account  of  being  meditated  on. 

Or  He  is  said  to  be  spatially  determined  because  He  is 
meditated  on  by  the  mind  inhabiting  the  heart  which  is  spatially 
limited,26  just  as  the  barley  measured  by  a  (vessel  called) 
prastha  is  said  to  be  a  prastha  in  quantity.  Although  it  is  a  fact 
that  barley  itself  has  some  intrinsic  quantity,  which  becomes 
obvious  from  its  contact  with  the  prastha ,  whereas  the  supreme 
Lord  has  no  measurement  to  be  revealed  by  His  contact  with 
the  heart,  still  it  is  asserted  that  the  text  about  spatial  manifesta¬ 
tion  can  somehow  be  explained  on  the  basis  of  remembrance 
(of  God).27  Or  to  make  the  text  about  the  revelation  in  space 
fruitful,  the  meaning  is  that  the  supreme  Self,  which  has  no 
spatial  limitation,  is  to  be  meditated  on  as  though  spatially 
determined.  Thus  the  teacher  Badari  thinks  that  the  text  about 
spatial  limitation  occurs  from  the  standpoint  of  meditation. 

W*Mf<fd  II  W  II 

Because  of  meditation  based  on  superimposition  so 
says  Jaimini,  because  ^PTTso  55m  fa  (another  text)  shows. 

31.  According  to  Jaimini,  the  spatial  limitation  is  (justifiable) 
Decause  of  the  meditation  based  on  superimposition;  for  this  is 
shown  (in  another  text). 

“That  which  is  measured  ( mita )  by  the  mind,  existing  in  the  space 
( pradesa )  in  the  heart,  is  pradesamatra. 

”  The  spatial  limitation  of  the  heart  becomes  superimposed  on  the 
remembrance  by  the  mind.  And  since  God  too  is  present  in  the  same 
remembrance  (or  meditation),  this  limitation  becomes  superimposed  on 
Him  as  well. 


156  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  ii.  31 

Or  the  text  about  spatial  limitation  may  be  there  because  of  the 
meditation  through  superimposition  (i.e.  imagining  a  small  thing 
to  be  great). 

How? 

For  so  in  a  similar  context  in  the  Vajasaneya  brahmcma,  the 
limbs  counting  from  heaven  to  the  earth,  of  the  Vai£vanara 
Self,  embodied  in  the  three  worlds,  are  superimposed  on  the 
physical  limbs  counting  from  the  top  of  the  head  to  the  chin; 
and  thus  this  brahmcma  shows  how  the  supreme  Lord  becomes 
spatially  limited  in  *a  meditation  based  on  superimposition  (S.  B. 
X.  vi.  1.11):  (King  Aivapati  said  to  the  Brahmanas,  PracTnaSala 
and  others) — “The  gods  knew  Him  fully  as  though  spatially 
limited;  they  knew  Him  as  the  inmost  Self.  Therefore  I  shall  speak 
of  those  limbs  to  you  in  that  very  way.  I  shall  superimpose 
them  just  according  to  their  spatial  limitation.  While  teaching 
about  the  crop  of  the  head,  he  (the  king)  said,  ‘This  (crop  of 
my  head)  is  Vaisvanara  as  the  all-surpassing  (heaven).’  Teach¬ 
ing  about  the  two  eyes,  he  said,  ‘This  (the  two  eyes  of  mine) 
is  VaiSvanara  as  the  sun  (which  is  His  eye).’  Teaching  about 
the  nostrils,  he  said,  ‘This  is  Vaisvanara  as  air  (which  is  His 
breath).’  Teaching  about  the  space  in  the  mouth,  he  said,  ‘This 
is  Vaisvanara  as  the  vast  space  (which  is  His  trunk).’  Teaching 
about  the  saliva  in  the  mouth,  he  said,  ‘This  is  Vaisvanara  as 
water  (which  is  His  bladder).’  Teaching  about  the  chin,  he  said, 
‘This  is  VaiSvanara  as  the  earth  (which  constitutes  His  feet)’.” 
By  the  word  cubuka  (chin)  is  to  be  understood  the  lower 
(jaw)  bone  of  the  face.  Although  the  Vajasaneya  br&hma'Qa 
speaks  of  heaven  as  all-surpassing  and  the  sun  as  brilliant,  while 
in  the  Chandogya,  heaven  is  spoken  of  as  brilliant  and  the  sun 
as  possessed  of  many  forms,  still  this  difference  is  nothing 
damaging;28  for  the  Vedic  statement  about  spatial  limitation 
is  the  same.  And  (it  will  be  shown  that)  the  same  kind  of 
meditation  (on  Vaisvanara  and  others)  is  in  evidence  in  all 
the  branches  (of  the  Vedas).  The  teacher  Jaimini  thinks  that 

"It  will  be  shown  later  that  the  texts  have  to  be  reconciled  by  adding 
to  one  the  qualities  mentioned  in  the  other.  Thus  both  the  texts  have  to 
accept  heaven  as  both  brilliant  and  all-surpassing.  Or  it  may  be  said  that, 
though  the  attributes  differ,  the  meditation  is  the  same. 


I.  ii.  32]  BRAHMA -SCrTRA-BHASYA  157 

it  is  more  logical  to  say  that  the  text  about  spatial  limitation 
occurs  for  the  sake  of  meditation  based  on  superimposition. 

3TFHfcl  II  ^  II 

And  they  remember  this  One  in  this 

place. 

32.  And  they  (the  followers  of  the  Jabala  branch)  remember 
(i.e.  read  of)  this  One  ( i.e .  God)  in  this  place  (i.e.  in  between 
the  head  and  the  chin). 

And  the  followers  of  the  Jabala  branch  remember  this  One, 
i.e.  the  supreme  Lord,  in  this  place,  i.e.  in  between  the  top  of 
the  head  and  the  chin:  “(Yajnavalkya) — ‘That  which  is  this 
infinite  and  inscrutable  Self  is  seated  (that  is  to  say,  has  to  be 
meditated  upon)  on  this  one  that  is  under  bondage  (i.e.  the 
individual  being.’  (Atri) — ‘Where  is  the  one  under  bondage 
seated?’  ‘He  is  established  in  between  Varand  and  Nasi .’  ‘Which 
is  Varand  and  which  is  Nasi ?’”  (Jabala  2).  In  that  text,  again, 
it  is  ascertained  that  this  one  (i.e.  the  eyebrows)  and  the  nose 
are  Varand  and  Nasi  from  the  derivation  of  Varand  as  that 
which  wards  off  ( vdrayati )  all  the  sins  committed  by  the  senses, 
and  of  Nasi  as  that  which  destroys  (ndsayati)  all  the  sins  com¬ 
mitted  by  the  senses.  The  Jabalas  read  furthermore,  “‘Which 
becomes  the  seat  for  this  one  (i.e.  the  individual  being)?’  ‘That 
which  constitutes  the  link  between  the  eyebrows  and  the  nose 
becomes  the  link  between  heaven  and  the  supreme  place  (of 
Brahman)’29”  (ibid.).  Therefore  the  text  about  spatial  limita¬ 
tion  is  appropriate  with  regard  to  the  supreme  Self. 

And  the  term  abhivimana  in  the  text  is  used  to  indicate  the 
innermost  Self,  in  the  derivative  sense  of  that  which  is  known 
directly  ( abhbiimyate )  as  the  inmost  Self  by  all  beings;  or  in  the 
sense  of  that  which  is  directly  attained  ( abhigata )  as  the  inner¬ 
most  at  the  same  time  that  it  is  free  from  any  measurement 


29  This  place  is  to  be  meditated  on  as  the  link  between  the  two.  Some 
read  bhruvoh  pranasya  ca  in  place  of  bhruvorghranasya  ca ,  where 
prana  means  ghrana  (nose). 


158 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.  ii.  32 


(vimana)\  or  in  the  sense  of  that  which  creates  diversely 
(abhivrmimtte)  the  whole  universe,  It  being  the  source  of  all. 

Therefore  it  is  proved  that  Vaisvanara  must  be  the  supreme 
Self. 


Section  III 


Topic  1:  The  Abode  of  Heaven,  Earth,  etc. 

ii?ii 

g  The  repository  of  heaven,  earth,  etc. 

on  account  of  the  word  denoting  Itself. 

1.  The  repository  of  heaven ,  earth ,  etc.  (is  the  supreme  Self) 
on  account  of  the  word  denoting  Itself. 

Doubt :  This  is  met  with  in  the  Upani$ad:  “Know  that  Self 
alone  which  is  one  without  a  second,  on  which  are  strung 
heaven,  the  earth,  and  inter-space,  the  mind  and  the  vital  forces 
together  with  all  the  other  organs;1  and  give  up  all  other  talks. 
This  is  the  dam  (or  bridge)  leading  to  immortality”  (Mu.  II. 
ii.  5).  Here  from  the  mention  of  the  subsistence  of  heaven  etc., 
it  becomes  obvious  that  something  exists  as  the  repository.  The 
doubt  arises  as  to  whether  this  container  (or  abode)  is  the 
supreme  Brahman  or  something  else. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  obvious  meaning  is  that  something 
other  than  Brahman  must  be  this  repository. 

Why? 

Because  we  hear  from  the  Upani$ad,  “This  is  the  dam  leading 
to  immortality.”  A  dam  (or  bridge)  is  known  in  this  world  to 
be  connected  with  two  banks,  whereas  no  bank  can  be  admitted 
for  Brahman  in  the  face  of  the  Upani$adic  declaration:  “Infinite, 
shoreless”  (Br.  II.  iv.  12).  If  some  other  thing  has  to  be  admitted 
as  the  repository,  then  the  Pradhana,  well  known  in  the  Sirq*ti, 
should  be  accepted,  for  it  is  logical  for  it  to  be  the  repository, 
it  being  the  material  cause.  Or  it  can  be  the  air  well  known  in 
the  Upani$ad,  for  air  is  also  heard  of  as  something  holding 

aOn  Brahman  is  transfixed  Virat,  embodied  in  the  three  worlds;  and 
on  It,  again,  is  transfixed  Hiranyagarbha,  embodied  in  all  the  subde 
minds.  These  two  are  meant  by  the  references  to  the  gross  heaven  etc., 
and  the  subtle  mind  etc.,  respectively. 


160  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  1 

together,  in  the  text,  “ Vayu  (air),  O  Gautama,  is  that  Sutra 
(lit.  thread).  Through  this  Sutra  or  Vayu  this  and  the  next 
life  and  all  beings  are  held  together”  (Bj\  III.  vii.  2).  Or  it  can 
be  the  embodied  soul;  for  by  virtue  of  its  being  the  experiencer, 
it  can  justifiably  be  a  repository  in  relation  to  the  manifold 
world  of  enjoyment. 

Vedantin  :  .This  being  the  position,  it  is  said:  “The  repository 
of  heaven,  earth,  etc.”  The  compound  word  Dyubhuvau  is 
formed  by  dyu  (heaven)  and  bhu  (earth);  dyu-bhu-adi  means 
those  that  have  heaven  and  earth  at  the  beginning.  Since  in  this 
sentence  the  universe,  consisting  of  heaven,  earth,  inter-space, 
mind,  organs,  etc.  have  been  mentioned  as  transfixed  on  some 
entity  (Mu.  II.  ii.  5),  hence  the  repository  of  this  mu$t  logically 
be  Brahman. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  word  denoting  Itself”,  that  is  to  say, 
because  of  the  word  “Self’;  for  the  word  “Self”  does  occur 
here  in,  “know  that  Self  alone  that  is  one  without  a  second” 
(Mu.  II.  ii.  5).  And  the  word  “Self’  fits  in  quite  aptly  if  the 
supreme  Self  is  understood  by  it,  but  not  so  if  the  meaning  lie 
something  else.  Moreover,  in  some  places,  Brahman  is  spoken 
of  as  the  repository  by  Its  very  name,  as  in,  “O  amiable  one, 
all  these  beings  have  Existence  as  their  source,  Existence  as  their 
repository,  and  Existence  as  their  culmination”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  4). 
Besides,  Brahman  is  mentioned  by  Its  very  name  earlier  as 
well  as  later  in  this  very  context:  “Puru$a  alone  is  all  this — 
comprising  the  karma  and  knowledge.  He  who  knows  this 
supreme  immortal  Brahman”  (Mu.  II.  i.  10),  “All  that  is  in 
front  is  but. Brahman,  the  immortal.  Brahman  is  on  the  right, 
as  well  as  on  the  left.  Above  and  below  too  is  extended  Brah¬ 
man  alone”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11).  From  hearing  in  that  context  of 
the  relation,  existing  between  a  container  and  the  thing  con¬ 
tained,  and  from  the  appositional  use  (asserting  Brahman’s 
identity  with  all)  in,  “All  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1),  the 
doubt  may  arise  that  just  as  a  tree  is  a  composite  entity,  com¬ 
prising  as  it  does  the  branches,  trunk,  and  roots,  so  also  the 
Self  is  variegated  and  possessed  of  diverse  tastes.  In  order  to 
obviate  that  doubt,  the  text  declares  with  emphasis:  “Know 


I.  iii.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  161 

that  Self  alone  that  is  one  without  a  second”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  5).  The 
idea  expressed  is  this:  The  Self  is  not  to  be  cognized  as  a 
heterogeneous  thing  comprising  the  manifold  created  universe. 

How  is  It  then  to  be  cognized? 

The  meaning  is  that,  after  eliminating,  through  knowledge, 
the  universe  conjured  up  by  ignorance,  you  should  know'  that 
one  and  homogeneous  Self  alone  that  appears  as  the  repository. 
Just  as  when  somebody  is  told,  “Bring  that  on  which  Deva- 
datta  sits”,  one  brings  the  seat  alone,  but  not  Devadatta; 
similarly  the  homogeneous  Self,  appearing  as  the  repository,  is 
taught  here  as  the  object  to  be  known.  Furthermore,  we  hear 
"  of  the  condemnation  of  one  who  clings  to  the  unreal  created 
things:  “He  goes  from  death  to  death  who  sees  as  though  there 
is  difference  here  (in  Brahman)”  (Ka.  II.  i.  11).  As  for  the 
use  of  “all”  and  “Brahman”  in  apposition  in  the  text,  “All  this 
is  (but)  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1),  it  is  meant  for  the  elimina¬ 
tion  of  the  universe,2  and  not  for  proving  heterogeneity  (in 
Brahman).  For  we  hear  of  homogeneity  in,  “As  a  lump  of 
salt  is  without  interior  and  exterior,  entire  and  purely  saline  in 
taste,  even  so  is  the  Self  without  interior  and  exterior,  entire, 
and  pure  Intelligence  alone”  (Br  IV.  v.  13).  Hence  the  supreme 
Brahman  is  the  repository  of  heaven,  earth,  etc. 

As  for  the  objection,  that  from  the  mention  of  the  dam  in 
the  Upani$ad  and  from  the  fact  that  a  dam  is  associated  with 
banks,  something  other  than  Brahman  should  be  the  respository 
of  heaven  and  earth,  the  reply  is  this:  By  the  text  about  the 
dam,  the  only  point  sought  to  be  illustrated  is  the  fact  of 
holding  together  (or  impounding)  and  not  the  possession  of 
banks.  It  does  not  follow  that,  since  a  dam  in  this  world  is 
made  of  earth  and  timber,  the  dam  mentioned  here  is  also 
assumed  to  be  similarly  constructed.  The  word  dam  itself 
(etymologically)  implies  mere  holding  together,  but  not  pos¬ 
session  of  banks  etc.,  for  the  word  setu  (dam)  is  derived  from 

2  To  remove  the  false  conception  of  a  stump  as  a  thief,  somebody  may 
say,  “Your  thief  is  a  stump”,  which  statement  denies  the  existence  of 
the  thief,  and  is  not  meant  to  establish  the  identity  of  the  thief  and  the 
stump.  So  in  the  present  case,  the  apposition  docs  not  imply  that  Brahman 
and  creation  are  equally  true. 


11 


162  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  1 

the  root  $in  in  the  sense  of  impounding  (the  water  from  flow¬ 
ing  out). 

Somebody  else  says:  The  knowledge  of  the  Self  met  with  in 
the  text,  “Know  that  Self  alone”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  5),  and  the  dis¬ 
carding  of  speech  met  with  in  the  text,  “give  up  all  other 
talks”  (ibid.),  are  also  declared  here  by  the  text,  “this  is  the 
dam  leading  to  immortality”,  for  these  two  constitute  the  means 
(the  bridge)  leading  to  immortality.  But  Brahman  as  the 
repository  of  heaven  and  earth  is  not  spoken  of. 

Vedantin :  The  objection  raised  on  that  supposition,  to  the 
effect  that  the  text  about  the  dam  reveals  something  other  than 
Brahman  as  the  repository  of  heaven  and  earth,  is  illogical. 

IRII 

2.  Because  there  is  the  instruction  about  (Its)  attainment  by 
the  free. 

From  this  additional  reason  that  this  repository  of  heaven, 
earth,  etc.  is  taught  as  the  goal  to  be  reached  by  the  liberated, 
it  follows  that  this  repository  is  the  supreme  Brahman.  Mukto- 
pasrpya  means  attainable  by  those  freed  from  bondage. 
Nescience  consists  in  the  idea  of  Selfhood  entertained  about 
the  body  etc.,  which  are  not  the  Self.  As  a  result  of  this  self- 
identification,  follow  love  for  those  who  adore  that  body  and 
hatred  for  those  who  dishonour  it,  and  fear  and  confusion 
from  noticing  its  death.  In  this  way,  this  multitude  of  evils, 
with  infinite  differences,  that  flows  on  for  ever,  is  obvious  to 
all  of  us.  In  contradiction  to  this,  it  is  stated  with  regard  to 
this  repository  of  heaven  and  earth  that  It  is  to  be  reached  by 
those  who  are  free  from  such  defects  as  ignorance,  love,  hatred, 
etc. 

How  is  it  stated? 

Having  declared,  “When  that  Self,  which  is  both  high  and 
low  (i.e.  cause  and  effect),  is  realized,  the  knots  of  the  heart 
get  untied,  all  the  doubts  become  solved,  and  all  actions  become 
dissipated”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  8),  it  is  stated,  “As  the  rivers,  flowing 


I.  iii.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  163 

down,  become  indistinguishable  on  reaching  the  sea  by  giving 
up  their  names  and  forms,  so  also  the  illumined  soul,  having 
become  freed  from  name  and  form,  reaches  the  self-effulgent 
Puru$a  that  is  higher  than  the  higher  Maya  (unmanifested 
Nature)”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  8).  And  it  is  well  known  from  such 
texts  as  the  following  that  Brahman  is  attainable  by  the  liber¬ 
ated:  “When  all  the  desires  that  dwell  in  his  heart  are  gone, 
then  he,  having  been  mortal,  becomes  immortal  and  attains 
Brahman  even  in  this  body”  (B{\  IV.  iv.  7).  But  Pradhana 
and  the  rest  are  nowhere  known  to  be  attainable  by  the 
■liberated.  Again,  with  regard  to  the  entity  that  is  the  repository 
of  heaven  and  earth  it  is  stated  here  in  the  text,  “Know  that 
Self  alone  and  give  up  all  other  talks”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  5),  that  this 
entity  is  realizable  after  the  giving  up  of  speech  (that  is  to  say, 
the  activities  of  all  organs).  And  this  very  fact  is  found  to  be 
declared  in  another  Upanijad  in  connection  with  Brahman: 
“The  intelligent  aspirant  after  Brahman,  knowing  about  this 
alone,  should  attain  intuitive  knowledge.  He  should  not  think 
of  too  many  words,  for  it  is  particularly  fatiguing  to  the  organ 
of  speech”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  21).  For  this  reason  also  the  abode  of 
heaven  and  earth  is  Brahman. 

ll^ll 

•T  Not  any  inferential  entity  3r-a^-3|«3iq  on  account 

of  absence  of  any  word  indicating  it. 

5.  No  inferential  entity  (is  the  repository),  for  there  is  no 
word  of  that  import. 

It  is  being  stated  that  there  is  no  uncommon  ground  of 
inference  establishing  anything  else,  in  the  same  sense  that  there 
is  an  uncommon  ground  of  inference  (viz  the  word)  to  prove 
Brahman.  “The  inferential  entity”,  viz  Pradhana  fancied  in  the 
Smrti  of  the  Samkhyas,  “is  not”  to  be  understood  here  as  the 
abode  of  heaven  and  earth  etc. 

Why? 

“For  there  is  no  word  of  that  import.”  “A  word  of  that 
import”  means  some  word  establishing  that  insentient  Pradhana. 


164  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.5 

An  absence  of  such  a  word  is  meant.  There  is  no  word  here 
to  prove  Pradhana,  on  the  strength  of  which  the  insentient 
Pradhana  could  have  been  understood  either  as  the  cause  or 
the  abode.  (Or  the  meaning  of  atacchabdat  is):  There  are  words 
of  contrary  import  in  evidence  here,  which  establish  a  sentient 
entity  opposed  to  it  (Pradhana),  as  for  instance,  “He  who  is 
omniscient  in  general  and  all-knowing  in  detail”  (Mu.  I.  i.  9). 
For  this  very  reason,  air  too  is  not  accepted  here  as  the  abode 
of  heaven,  earth,  etc. 


STFPJt?  11*11 

^  living  creature  ^  also  (is  not  so). 

4 .  A  living  creature  also  is  not  so . 

It  is  true  that  a  living  being,  identifying  itself  with  intelli¬ 
gence,  can  be  the  Self  and  can  have  sentience;  but  there  can 
be  no  omniscience  for  one  whose  knowledge  is  circumscribed 
by  limiting  adjuncts.  And  hence  on  the  very  ground  of  the 
presence  of  words  of  a  contrary  import,3  a  living  being  is 
not  to  be  accepted  as  the  repository  of  heaven  and  earth.  More¬ 
over,  it  is  impossible  for  a  living  creature,  circumscribed  as  it 
is  by  conditioning  factors,  to  be  the  repository  of  heaven,  earth, 
etc.  in  the  fullest  sense.  The  present  aphorism  is  framed  separately 
(from  the  earlier  one)  in  order  to  connect  it  with  the  succeeding 
ones.4 

For  what  further  reason  is  the  living  being  not  to  be  accepted 
as  the  repository  of  heaven,  earth  etc.? 

||*|| 

5 .  (And)  because  there  is  a  mention  of  difference . 

•Viz  that  “Self*,  used  in  apposition  with  omniscience  (in  Mu.  II.  ii.  7), 
can  mean  God  alone. 

4  Although  the  “not”  borrowed  from  the  earlier  aphorism  connects 
these  together,  still  the  fourth  one  is  independent,  since  the  individual 
soul  is  dealt  with  here  as  well  as  in  the  succeeding  ones,  and  not  Pradhana 
as  in  the  third  one. 


I.iii.7]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  165 

Moreover,  there  is  a  mention  of  difference  as  between  the 
knowable  object  and  the  knower,  in  the  text,  “Know  that  Self 
alone  that  is  one  without  a  second”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  5).  In  that  text 
the  knower  is  a  living  creature,  since  it  hankers  for  freedom. 
And  by  the  method  of  residue,  Brahman,  mentioned  by  the 
word  Self,  is  the  object  to  be  known  and  is  the  respository  of 
heaven,  earth,  etc.,  but  not  so  is  a  living  creature. 

What  additional  reason  is  there  for  not  accepting  a  living 
being  as  the  abode  of  heaven,  earth  etc.? 

SHHPIT3  ll^ll 

6.  On  account  of  the  context . 

And  because  this  is  a  context  of  the  supreme  Self.  This  is 
evident  from  the  text,  “O  adorable  sir,  (which  is  that  thing) 
which  having  been  known,  all  this  becomes  known?”  (Mu.  I. 
i.  3),  where  the  knowledge  of  all  is  made  to  depend  on  the 
knowledge  of  one.  For  it  is  only  by  knowing  the  supreme  Self, 
that  is  the  Self  of  all,  that  all  this  becomes  known;  but  not  so 
by  knowing  merely  a  living  creature. 

For  what  more  reason  a  living  being  is  not  to  be  accepted 
as  the  abode  of  heaven,  earth,  etc.? 

rwq<Wr*TT  ^  IIV9I1 

fotfcr-arenmm  ^  i 

7.  And  on  account  of  the  facts  of  staying  on  and  eating. 

While  presenting  the  abode  of  heaven,  earth,  etc.,  the 
facts  of  staying  on  and  eating  (i.e.  experiencing)  are  stated 
in  the  text,  “Two  birds  that  are  ever  associated  and  have  simi¬ 
lar  names”  etc,  (Mu.  III.  i.  1),  the  experience  of  the  results  of 
work  being  mentioned  in,  “Of  these  the  one  eats  the  fruits  of 
divergent  tastes”  (ibid.),  and  staying  on  indifferently  being 
mentioned  in,  “The  other  looks  on  without  eating”  (ibid.). 
By  these  two  facts  of  staying  on  and  eating,  God  and  the 
individual  soul  are  understood  in  that  context.  Provided  God 
had  been  sought  to  be  presented  as  the  abode  of  heaven,  earth. 


166  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  7 

etc.  (in  Mu.  II.  ii.  5),  then  only  it  becomes  proper  to  speak  of 
Him,  who  is  already  the  subject  under  discussion,  as  separate 
from  the  individual  soul.  Otherwise  it  will  amount  to  speaking 
suddenly  about  something  out  of  context  and  unrelated. 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  mention  of  the  individual  soul  as 
different  from  God  equally  out  of  context  even  in  your  case? 

Vedantin :  No,  for  the  soul  (as  such)  is  not  presented  as 
the  subject-matter  of  the  topic.  The  individual  soul,  present 
in  every  body  as  the  agent  and  experiencer  in  association  with 
such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the  intellect,  is  known  from  common 
experience  itself,  and  so  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ads 
for  its  own  sake.  But  as  God  is  not  thus  familiarly  known  from 
common  experience,  He  is  intended  to  be  declared  in  the 
Upani$ad  for  His  own  sake.  Hence  it  is  not  proper  to  say  that 
any  mention  of  Him  is  uncalled  for.  It  was  also  shown  under 
the  aphorism,  “The  two  who  have  entered  into  the  cavity  are 
the  individual  Self  and  the  supreme  Self”  (B.  S.  I.  ii.  11),  that 
God  and  the  individual  soul  are  spoken  of  in  the  verse,  “Two 
birds”  etc.  (Mu.  III.  i.  1).  Even  though  it  is  said  in  the  explana¬ 
tion  offered  by  the  Paihgi  Upani$ad  that  the  sattva  (intellect) 
and  the  individual  soul  are  spoken  of  in  this  verse,  still  there  is 
no  contradiction. 

How? 

For  what  is  repudiated  here  is  that  any  living  creature  can  be 
the  repository  of  heaven,  earth,  etc.,  the  reason  being  that,  just 
like  the  space  within  a  pot,  this  creature  is  perceived  separately 
in  every  body  as  identified  with  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the 
sattva. .  But  He  who  is  cognized  in  all  bodies  as  free  from  all  limit¬ 
ing  adjuncts  must  necessarily  be  the  supreme  Self.  Just  as  much 
as  the  spaces  within  pots  etc.,  when  perceived  as  free  from  the 
limitations  of  the  pots  etc.,  are  but  the  cosmic  space,  similarly 
since  the  living  creatures  (freed  from  their  adjuncts)  are  not 
logically  different  from  the  supreme  Self,  therefore  it  is  not 
possible  to  deny  them  (as  the  repository  of  heaven  etc.).  Hence 
what  is  really  denied  is  that  the  soul  identifying  itself  with  the 
sattva  etc.  can  be  the  repository  of  heaven,  earth,  etc. 
Accordingly  the  supreme  Brahman  is  alone  the  repository  of 
heaven,  earth,  etc.;  and  this  was  established  by  the  earlier 


I.iii.8] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


167 


aphorism,  “The  entity  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  not  being 
seen  and  so  on  is  Brahman,  for  Its  characteristics  are  spoken  of' 
(I.  ii.  21).  For  in  connection  with  that  very  text  about  the 
source  of  all  beings,  we  read,  “on  which  are  strung  heaven,  the 
earth,  and  inter-space”  etc.  (Mu.  II.  ii.  5).  That  subject  is  revived 
here  for  the  sake  of  elaboration.® 

Topic  2:  Bhuman  (Infinite,  Plenitude) 

^RT  Bhuman  (is  Brahman),  the  teaching  having  been 

imparted  qssrqreTf  as  superior  to  sampras&da. 

8 .  Bhuman  is  the  supreme  Self ,  since  He  is  taught  as  superior 
to  samprasada  (i.e.  Prana  or  vital  force). 

Doubt :  This  is  stated  in  the  Upani§ad:  “(Sanatkumara  said), 
‘But  Bhuman  (the  Infinite)  has  surely  to  be  inquired  into.’ 
(Narada  said),  ‘O  venerable  sir,  I  hanker  to  understand  the 
Infinite.’  (Sanatkumara  said),  ‘That  is  the  Infinite  in  which  one 
does  not  see  anything  else,  does  not  hear  anything  else,  does 
not  know  anything  else.  And  that  is  limited  where  one  sees 
something  else'”  etc.  (Ch.  VII.  xxiii-xxiv).  Here  the  doubt 
arises:  Is  Prana  the  Bhuman  (Infinite)  or  is  the  supreme  Self 
so? 

Why  does  the  doubt  arise? 

By  the  word  Bhuman  is  meant  plenitude,  for  it*  is  mentioned 
in  the  Smjti  (i.e.  Panini’s  grammar),  “The  word  bhUman  is 
derived  from  the  word  bahu  (much,  many)  with  the  suffix 
iman  added  after  it,  and  then  the  i  of  the  suffix  is  dropped  and 
bhu  is  substituted  for  bahu  (to  give  rise  to  the  abstract  counter¬ 
part  of  bahu)”  (VI.  iv.  158).  The  Smjti  speaks  of  the  word 
bhuman  as  having  a  suffix  added  to  it  to  impart  the  sense  of 
the  abstract  noun.  When  the  curiosity  about  the  nature  of 
that  plenitude  arises,  it  becomes  obvious  from  the  text,  “ Prana 
is  certainly  greater  than  hope”  (Ch.  VII.  xv.  1),  that  Prana  is 
Bhuman  because  of  proximity.  Similarly  from  the  way  the 

“Showing  that  the  source  of  all  is  also  the  inmost  Self  of  all. 


168  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  8 

topic  is  introduced  in,  “For  it  has  surely  been  heard  by  me 
from  persons  of  your  standing  that  the  knower  of  the  Self 
crosses  over  sorrow.  Here  am  I  such  a  sorrowing  man,  O 
venerable  sir,  ferry  me  across  this  sorrow,  sorrowful  as  I  am” 
(Ch.  VII.  i.  3),  it  appears  equally  that  B human  is  the  supreme 
Self.  Of  these  two,  it  becomes  a  matter  of  doubt  as  to  which 
is  to  be  accepted  and  which  rejected.  What  would  be  the 
conclusion  here? 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  is  that  Prana  is  Bhuman, 

Why? 

Because  it  is  noticed  that  the  (series  of)  questions  and 
answers  are  concerned  with  something  greater  ( bhuyan ),  for 
instance,  (it  is  asked  by  Narada),  “O  venerable  sir,  is  there 
anything  greater  than  name?”  (Ch.  VII.  i.  5),  and  the  answer 
(by  Sanatkumara)  is,  “The  organ  of  speech  is  surely  greater 
than  name”  (Ch.  VII.  ii.  1).  Similar  are  (the  question),  “O 
venerable  sir,  is  there  anything  greater  than  the  vocal  organ?” 
(Ch.  VII.  ii.  2),  and  (the  answer),  “The  mind  is  surely  greater 
than  the  vocal  organ”  (Ch.  VII.  iii.  1).  Here  a  chain  of  ques¬ 
tions  and  answers  extends  from  name  etc.  to  Prana .  But  after 
Prana  no  such  question  and  answer  are  found  in  the  shape  of 
“O  venerable  sir,  is  there  anything  greater  than  Prana?”  and 
“Such  a  thing  is  surely  greater  than  Prana”  But  in  the  text, 
starting  with,  “Prana  is  surely  greater  than  hope”  (Ch.  VII. 
xv.  1),  Prana  is  spoken  of  in  detail  as  the  greatest  of  all  things 
counting  from  name  etc.  and  ending  with  hope.  Then  in  the 
text,  “(Should  he  be  told),  ‘You  are  transcending  all  in  your 
speech’,  he  should  say,  ‘Yes,  I  do  transcend’,  he  should  not 
deny”  (Ch.  VII.  xv.  4),  it  is  acknowledged  that  for  one  who 
realizes  Prana ,  there  accrues  the  power  of  transcending  all 
others  in  speech  (i.e.  establishing  his  assertion  as  the  final  one). 
Lastly  it  is  said,  “But  this  person  verily  transcends  all  others 
in  his  speech,  who  transcends  them  with  the  help  of  truth” 
(Ch.  VII.  xvi.  1),  where  the  vow  of  Prana ,  consisting  in  tran¬ 
scending  all  other  things  is  alluded  to.  And  without  discarding 
Prana ,  the  Bhuman  is  introduced  through  a  chain  of  truth  and 
the  rest.  From  all  this  it  becomes  clear  that  the  text  regards 
Prana  itself  as  Bhuman . 


Liu. 8]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  169 

Objection  :  How,  again,  after  explaining  Prana  as  Bhuman 
would  you  explain  the  text,  “That  in  which  one  does  not  see 
anything  else”  etc.  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  2),  which  sets  forth  the 
characteristics  of  Bhuman ? 

Opponent :  The  answer  is:  That  definition,  viz  “That  in 
which  one  does  not  see  anything  else”,  is  applicable  to  Prana 
also,  since  it  is  a  matter  of  experience  that  all  such  activities 
as  seeing  cease  in  deep  sleep  when  all  the  organs  merge  in 
Prana.  Thus  the  (Prasna)  Upani$ad  also  speaks  of  the  state  of 
sleep  as  a  state  of  the  merger  of  all  the  activities  of  the  organs, 
in  the  text,  “This  person  does  not  then  hear,  does  not  see” 
(IV.  2),  and  then  in  that  very  state  it  shows  the  sleeplessness 
of  Prana  with  its  fivefold  functions,  in  the  text,  “It  is  the  fires 
of  Prana 6  that  really  keep  awake  in  this  city  (of  the  body)” 
(Pr.  IV.  3),  thereby  showing  that  the  state  of  sleep  is  domi¬ 
nated  over  by  Prana.  The  mention  of  happiness  in  relation  to 
Bhuman  in,  “That  which  is  Bhuman  is  bliss”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiii)  is 
also  not  irreconcilable  (with  Prana);  for  we  hear  of  bliss  in  the 
state  of  sleep  in,  “Then  in  that  state  the  deity  does  not  see 
dreams.  Then  at  that  time  there  occurs  this  kind  of  happiness 
in  the  body”  (Pr.  IV.  6).  The  text,  “That  which  is  Bhuman  is 
immortal”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1)  is  also  not  irreconcilable  with 
Prana;  for  the  Upani§adic  text  says  uPrana  is  surely  immortal” 
(Kau.  III.  2). 

Objection  :  On  the  assumption  that  Prmia  is  Bhuman ,  how 
would  you  justify  the  introduction  of  the  topic  from  the  point 
of  view  of  a  desire  for  the  realization  of  the  Self,  as  is  evident 
from  the  text,  “The  knower  of  the  Self  crosses  over  sorrow” 
(Ch.  VII.  i.  3)? 

Opponent :  We  say  that  Prana  itself  is  here  intended  to  stand 
for  the  Self;  and  that  is  why  Prana  is  shown  as  identified  with 
all  in,  uPrana  is  father,  Prana  is  mother,  Prana  is  brother, 
Pra?ia  is  sister.  Prana  is  teacher,  Prana,  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  VII. 
xv.  1).  The  identity  of  Prana  with  Bhuman  in  the  sense  of  vast¬ 
ness  is  also  possible  from  the  mention  of  Praiia's  identity  with  all 


flGarhapatya  fire  as  Apana,  Anvaharyapacana  as  Vyana ,  Ahavanlya  as 
Prana  (Pr.  IV.  3). 


170  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA§Y  A  [I.ui.  8 

and  the  illustration  of  the  spokes  and  nave  in  the  text,  “As  the 
spokes  are  fixed  on  a  nave,  so  also  are  all  these  fixed  on  Praipa” 
(Ch.  VII.  xv.  L).  Therefore  the  conclusion  arrived  at  is  this 
that  Prana  is  Bhuman. 

Vedantin :  Hence  it  is  stated:  The  supreme  Self  alone  can  be 
the  BhUman  here,  and  not  Prana. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  instruction  about  His  superiority  to  sampra - 
sada.  Samprasada  means  deep  sleep  from  the  derivative  sense  of 
the  state  in  which  one  becomes  fully  serene.  This  is  confirmed 
by  the  Bjrhadaragyaka  also  because  it  is  stated  there  along  with 
the  waking  and  dream  states  (IV.  iii.  15-17).  And  since  Prdria 
keeps  awake  in  that  state  of  full  serenity,  therefore  in  this 
aphorism,  Pritya  is  accepted  as  the  meaning  of  samprasada.  So 
the  idea  implied  (by  the  aphorism)  is  this:  “Since  Bhuman  is 
taught  to  be  superior  to  Prana ,  therefore  if  Prana  itself  be 
Bhuman ,  then  the  teaching  about  its  own  superiority  to  itself 
will  be  incongruous.  For  instance,  when  the  instruction  is 
given  that  something  is  superior  to  name,  it  is  not  implied  that 
name  itself  is  superior  to  name.” 

What  then  is  taught  to  be  superior? 

Something  different  from  name  and  called  vocal  organ  is 
taught  in,  “The  vocal  organ  is  surely  superior  to  name”  (Ch. 
VII.  ii.  1).  Similarly  in  all  the  (succeeding)  stages,  some  things 
different  from  those  respective  (earlier)  things  themselves, 
counting  from  the  vocal  organ  to  Prana ,  are  taught  as  being 
superior.  In  the  same  way,  the  Bhuman ,  that  is  taught  to  be 
superior  to  Prana,  must  be  something  other  than  Prana. 

Opponent :  But  there  is  no  question  here  like  “O  venerable 
sir,  is  there  anything  higher  than  Prana ?”  Nor  is  there  an  answer 
of  the  form,  “Such  a  thing  is  surely  greater  than  Prapj.”  So 
how  can  it  be  said  that  Bhuman  is  taught  to  be  higher  than 
Prana ?  Moreover,  in  the  subsequent  passage  we  find  a  reference 
to  transcendence  in  speech  (i.e.  establishing  his  own  conclu¬ 
sion  exclusively)  by  relying  on  Prana  :  “But  he  really  transcends 
all  others  in  his  speech,  who  transcends  by  relying  on  truth” 
(Ch.  VII.  xvi.  1).  Hence  nothing  is  taught  as  higher  than  Prarja. 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this  we  say:  It  cannot  be  asserted 


I.iii.8]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  171 

that  the  reference  is  to  the  transcendence  in  speech  by  relying 
on  Prana  itself;  for  there  is  a  specific  mention  (of  truth)  in, 
“He  who  transcends  in  speech  by  relying  on  truth”  (ibid.). 

Opponent :  Should  not  that  specific  mention  too  refer  to 
Prana ? 

How? 

Just  as  in  the  sentence,  “He  indeed  is  a  true  performer  of 
Agnihotra  who  speaks  the  truth”,  a  man  does  not  become  a 
performer  of  Agnihotra  because  of  his  truthfulness. 

By  what  then? 

By  the  performance  of  the  Agnihotra  itself.  But  truthfulness 
is  mentioned  as  a  special  qualification  of  a  performer  of  Agni¬ 
hotra.  Similarly  in  the  sentence,  “But  he  really  transcends  in 
speech  who  transcends  by  relying  on  truth’,  the  transcendence 
in  speech  does  not  result  from  truthfulness. 

From  what  then? 

From  the  knowledge  of  Pritya  that  is  under  consideration. 
But  truthfulness  is  intended  as  a  special  qualification  of  the 
knower  of  Prana. 

V edantin :  We  say,  no;  for  that  will  lead  to  the  abandonment 
of  the  meaning  of  the  Upani$ad.  From  the  direct  text  of  the 
Upani$ad  it  is  obvious  that  the  transcendence  in  speech  results 
from  the  reliance  on  truth,  the  meaning  being,  “But  he  really 
transcends  in  speech  who  transcends  by  relying  on  truth.” 
There  is  no  declaration  of  the  knowledge  of  Prana  here.  The 
knowledge  of  Pram  can  perchance  be  brought  into  play  with 
the  help  of  the  context  only.  But  if  that  be  done,  the  direct 
text  will  be  overruled  by  the  context.7  And  on  this  interpreta¬ 
tion,  the  use  of  the  word  tu  (but)  as  in,  “But  he  really  trans¬ 
cends  in  speech”  (ibid.),  meant  to  distinguish  something  going 
to  be  discussed  from  something  that  preceded,  cannot  be 
justified.  And  the  text,  “But  truth  must  be  inquired  into”  (Ch. 
VII.  xvi.  1),  which  implies  an  additional  effort,  suggests  that  a 
fresh  subject  (other  than  Prim)  is  intended  to  be  introduced 
(by  the  word  “truth”).  Accordingly,  just  as  when  the  mastery 

’Which  is  inadmissible.  The  direct  text  is  “satyena — by  relying  on 
truth”.  A  direct  statement  is  more  authoritative  than  inference  through 
context. 


172  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.8, 

of  a  single  Veda  is  under  discussion,  and  some  one  says,  “But 
he  is  really  a  great  Brdhmana  who  reads  the  four  Vedas”,  the 
praise  relates  to  the  knower  of  the  four  Vedas  who  is  different 
from  the  knowers  of  a  single  Veda,  so  also  are  we  to  under¬ 
stand  here.  Besides,  there  is  no  such  rule  that  the  intention  to 
speak  about  a  new  thing  can  be  gathered  merely  from  a 
freshness  of  questions  and  answers.8  For  the  intention  of  a 
new  subject  can  be  understood  when  it  becomes  impossible  to 
keep  within  the  range  already  attained.  In  the  context  under 
discussion  (Ch.  VII.  xv-xvi),  Narada  becomes  silent  after 
hearing  the  teaching  up  to  Prana .  Then  Sanatkumara  voluntarily 
expounds  to  him  thus:  The  transcendence  in  speech  by  relying 
on  the  knowledge  of  Prana,  which  is  mutable  and  unreal,  is 
really  no  transcendence,  “but  he  really  transcends  all  others  in 
his  speech  who  transcends  by  relying  on  truth”.  In  that  text 
the  supreme  Brahman  is  meant  by  the  term  truth  ( satya ) 
because  that  is  the  highest  reality,  and  because  another  Upani- 
$ad  says,  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”  (Tai.  II. 
i.  1).  To  Narada  who  has  thus  been  enlightened,  and  who  has 
reacted  by  saying,  “O  venerable  sir,  I  want  to  transcend  all 
things  in  my  speech  by  relying  on  truth”  (Ch.  VII.  xvi.), 
Sanatkumara  teaches  Bhuman  through  a  succession  of  practices 
like  deep  meditation  etc.0  That  being  the  case,  it  is  understood 
that  the  very  truth  which  is  promised  to  be  spoken  of  as  higher 
than  Pram  (in  Ch.  VII.  xvi)  is  mentioned  here  (in  Ch.  VII. 
xxiii)  as  Bhuman .  Hence  there  does  occur  an  instruction  about 
Bhuman  as  superior  to  Prana.  And  in  this  way  the  starting  of 
the  topic  with  the  purpose  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  stands 
justified.  Moreover,  it  is  not  reasonable  to  say  that  Pram  itself 
is  intended  here  as  the  Self,  for  Prana  cannot  be  the  Self  in 
the  primary  sense.  Furthermore,  there  can  be  no  cessation  of 

“For  in  the  Brhadaranyaka,  Maitreyl  is  seen  to  question  Yajnavalkya 
repeatedly  about  the  very  same  Self.  And  in  the  illustration  of  the 
knowers  of  the  Vedas,  the  subject-matter  is  changed  even  without  the 
help  of  question  and  answer. 

• Ratnaprabha  interprets  “vijnana”  as  ntdidhyasana  (deep  concentra¬ 
tion)  and  “etc.”  as  manana  (reflection),  faith,  sravana  (hearing),  purity 
of  mind/  steadfastness,  and  efforts  for  attaining  these. 


I.iii.9]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  173 

sorrow  from  anything  but  the  knowledge  of  the  Self,  for 
another  Upani$ad  declares,  “(Knowing  Him  alone  one  goes 
beyond  death).  There  is  no  other  path  to  reach  the  goal” 
(Sv.  VI.  15).  And  starting  with,  “Take  me  across  sorrow,  such 
as  I  am,  O  venerable  sir,”  (Ch.  VII.  i.  3),  the  conclusion  is 
made  with,  “The  venerable  Sanatkumara  shows  the  other  shore 
of  darkness  to  him  from  whom  has  been  rubbed  away  all  attach¬ 
ment”  (Ch.  VII.  xxvi.  2).  By  the  word  darkness  ( tamas )  is 
meant  ignorance,  the  source  of  sorrow  etc.  And  if  the  instruc¬ 
tion  were  really  to  end  with  Prana  as  the  highest,  this  Prana 
would  not  have  been  declared  to  be  subject  to  something  else; 
and  yet  the  brahmana  text  runs  thus:  “From  the  Self  proceeds 
Prm”  (Ch.  VII.  xxvi.  1). 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  the  supreme  Self  is  intended 
to  be  dealt  with  at  the  end  of  the  context  (Ch.  VII.  xxvi);  but 
Bhuman  here  is  nothing  but  Prcnia . 

Vedantin :  No,  for  by  such  texts  as,  “On  what  is  He  (i.e. 
Bhuman )  seated,  O  venerable  sir?  ‘On  His  own  glory’  ”  (Ch. 
VII.  xxiv.  1),  Bhuman  is  carried  forward  right  up  to  the  end 
of  the  topic.  And  the  characteristic  of  Infinity,  expressed  as 
plenitude  (or  vastness),  fits  in  all  the  better  in  the  case  of  the 
supreme  Self,  since  It  is  the  source  of  all. 

115.11 

And  because  the  characteristics  are  appropriate. 

9 .  And  the  characteristics  of  Blrnman  are  appropriate  (for 
the  supreme  Self). 

Moreover,  the  characteristics  of  Bhuman,  mentioned  in  the 
Upani$ad,  are  appropriate  for  the  supreme  Self.  For  instance, 
the  Upani$ad  informs  us  of  the  absence  in  the  Bhuman  of  such 
acts  as  seeing,  in  the  passage,  “That  is  Bhuman  where  one  does 
not  see  anything  else,  does  not  know  anything  else”  (Ch.  VII. 
xxiv.  1);  and  this  absence  of  such  acts  as  seeing  is  known  to 
pertain  to  the  supreme  Self  from  the  other  Upani$adic  passage, 
“But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman  everything  has  become 
the  Self,  then  what  should  one  see  and  through  what?”  (Bj\ 


174  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iii.  9 

IV.  v.  15).  Even  the  absence  of  such  acts  as  seeing  in  the  state 
of  sleep,  mentioned  earlier  (Pr.  IV.  3),  was  done  so  with  a  view 
to  declaring  the  absence  of  any  relationship  in  the  case  of  the 
Self  Itself,  and  not  for  revealing  the  nature  of  Prana ,  for  the 
topic  there  was  of  the  supreme  Self.  Again,  the  happiness  that 
was  spoken  of  in  that  state  (Pr.  IV.  6)  was  stated  with  a  view 
to  revealing  the  nature  of  the  Self  as  Bliss  Itself;  for  it  is  said, 
“This  is  its  supreme  Bliss.  On  a  particle  of  this  very  Bliss  other 
beings  live”  (Bp.  IV.  iii.  32);  and  here  (in  the  Chandogya)  also 
it  is  said,  “That  which  is  B hitman  is  Bliss.  There  is  no  happiness 
in  the  limited;  the  Infinite  (Bhuman)  Itself  is  Bliss”  (Ch.  VII. 
xxiii),  where,  after  rejecting  the  happiness  mixed  with  sorrow, 
Bhuman  is  shown  to  be  nothing  but  Brahman  that  is  Bliss.  The 
immortality  that  is  heard  of  in  the  passage,  “That  which  is 
Infinite  ( Bhuman )  is  immortal”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1),  leads  us  to 
understand  the  supreme  cause;  for  the  immortality  present  in 
the  created  things  is  only  a  relative  reality,  as  is  evident  from 
another  Upani$ad,  “Everything  else  but  this  is  perishable”  (Bp. 
III.  iv.  2).  Similarly  also,  all  such  characteristics  as  truth, 
establishment  in  His  own  glory,  all-pervasiveness,  identity  with 
all,  which  are  met  with  in  the  Upani$ad,  are  appropriate  for 
the  supreme  Self  alone,  and  not  for  anything  else.  Therefore 
it  is  proved  that  Bhuman  is  the  supreme  Self. 

Topic  3:  Immutable 

ll?o|| 

The  ^k$ara  (Immutable)  on  account  of 

supporting  everything  up  to  space. 

10.  Akfara  is  Brahman  because  of  supporting  all  things  up  to 
(and  including )  space. 

Doubt :  It  is  heard  in  the  Upani$ad:  “(Garg!  asked),  ‘On 
what  is  space  woven  and  transfixed?’  (Bp.  III.  viii.  7).  (Yajnaval- 
kya  replied),  ‘O  GargI,  the  knowers  of  Brahman  say,  this 
Ak$ara  (immutable  Brahman)  is  that.  It  is  neither  gross  nor 
minute’”  etc.  (Bp.  III.  viii.  8).  With  regard  to  this  the  doubt 


I.  iii.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  175 

arises:  Is  the  letter  (Om)  meant  by  the  term  Ak$ara  (lit.  letter), 
or  is  the  supreme  Lord  Himself  meant? 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  in  such  passages  as  “The  enumeration 
of  letters”  (  group  of  14  aphorisms  of  Paijini),  the  word  ak$ara 
is  familiarly  used  in  the  sense  of  letter,  and  it  is  not  reasonable 
to  ignore  common  usage.  Another  Upani$ad  also  says,  “Om 
is  certainly  all  this”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  3),  where  for  the  sake  of 
meditation,  the  letter  Om  is  declared  to  be  identical  with  all. 
Therefore  the  word  ak$<rra  is  used  to  indicate  a  letter. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say,  the  supreme  Self 
is  meant  by  the  term  Ak$ara. 

Why? 

“Because  of  holding  everything  up  to  and  including  space”, 
because  of  supporting  all  created  things  from  earth  to  space. 
For  it  is  first  stated  in  the  text,  “That  remains  woven  and 
transfixed  on  unmanifested  space”  (Bj\  III.  viii.  7),  that  all 
created  things  counting  from  earth,  which  are  comprised 
within  the  three  divisions  of  time,  are  supported  by  space;  and 
then  this  topic  of  Ak$ara  is  mooted  through  the  question,  “On 
what  is  space  woven  and  transfixed?”  (ibid.).  The  conclusion 
is  also  made  in  a  similar  way:  “On  this  Ak$ara,  O  Gargi,  is  the 
(unmanifested)  space  woven  and  transfixed”  (Bj\  III.  viii.  11). 
This  supporting  of  everything  including  space  is  not  possible 
for  anything  else  but  Brahman.  As  for  the  quotation,  “Om  is 
surely  all  this”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  3),  that  must  be  understood  in  the 
sense  of  praise,  since  Om  is  a  means  for  the  realization  of 
Brahman.  Therefore  Ak$ara  must  be  the  supreme  Brahman 
according  to  its  derivative  sense  of  that  which  does  not  decay 
and  that  which  pervades  all,  conveying  thereby  the  ideas  of 
eternality  and  omnipresence. 

Opponent :  It  may  be  argued  that,  if  by  the  fact  of  support¬ 
ing  all  things  including  space  be  meant  the  dependence  (i.e. 
inclusion)  of  the  effect  on  the  cause,  then  this  holds  equally 
good  in  the  case  of  those  (Samkhyas)  who  stand  by  Pradhana 
as  the  cause.  So  how  can  akfara  be  known  to  be  Brahman  from 
the  fact  of  supporting  all  things  ending  with  space? 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  answer  comes: 


176  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA5YA  [I.iii.li 

m  ^  SRITCHI^  ll^ll 

^  And  that  act  (of  supporting)  owing  to  the 

mention  of  mighty  rule. 

11.  And  that  act  of  supporting  is  possible  for  God  only ,  owing 
to  the  mention  of  His  mighty  rule . 

That  act,  viz  the  supporting  of  all  things  ending  with  space, 
belongs  to  God  alone. 

Why? 

“Owing  to  the  mention  of  the  mighty  rule.”  For  we  hear  of 
the  mighty  rule  in  the  text:  “Under  the  mighty  rule  of  this 
Ak$ara  (Immutable),  O  Gargi,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  are  held 
in  their  positions”  etc.  (Bf.  III.  viii.  9).  And  this  mighty  rule 
is  a  work  of  the  supreme  Lord.  The  insentient  Pradhana  cannot 
exercise  this  mighty  rule;  for  insentient  things  like  earth  etc. 
do  not  have  this  mighty  rulership  over  pot  etc.,  though  they 
are  the  material  causes  of  these. 


12.  And  on  account  of  the  exclusion  from  being  other 
entities. 

For  the  further  reason  of  exclusion  from  being  other  entities, 
it  follows  that  Brahman  alone  is  the  meaning  of  the  term 
Ak$ara,  for  it  is  Brahman  alone  and  nothing  else  to  whom 
belongs  the  act  of  holding  all  things  ending  with  space. 

Opponent :  What  is  meant  by  this  “Exclusion  from  being 
other  entities”? 

Vedantin  :  What  is  meant  is  this:  Anyabhdva  means  the  state 
of  being  something  else;  the  exclusion  from  being  so  is  any  a - 
bhdva-vydvrtti.  The  text,  “This  Aksara,  O  Gargi,  is  never  seen, 
but  is  the  witness,  It  is  never  heard,  but  is  the  hearer;  It  is 
never  thought  of,  but  is  the  thinker;  It  is  never  known,  but  is 
the  knower”  (Bj\  III.  viii.  11),  distinguishes  Ak$ara,  supporting 
all  things  including  space,  from  everything  else  that  is  different 
from  Brahman  and  That  can  be  presumed  to  be  the  meaning 
of  the  term  Ak$ara.  In  that  text,  the  attributes  of  not  being 


I.  iii.  13]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  177 

seen  and  so  on  can  be  ascribed  to  Pradhana  also,  but  Pradhana 
cannot  be  said  to  be  a  witness  and  so  on,  since  it  is  insentient. 
From  the  denial  of  any  difference  in  the  Self,  as  stated  in,  “There 
is  no  other  witness  but  this”  (ibid.),  it  follows  that  the  embodied 
soul  too,  conditioned  by  limiting  adjuncts  as  it  is,  cannot  be 
the  meaning  of  Ak$ara.  And  this  is  so  for  the  additional  reason 
that  all  conditioning  factors  are  denied  by  the  text,  “without 
eyes  or  ears,  without  the  vocal  organ  or  mind”  (Bj\  III.  viii.  8), 
for  there  can  be  no  embodied  soul  unless  there  be  conditioning 
factors.  Hence  the  definite  conclusion  is  that  the  supreme 
Brahman  alone  is  the  Ak$ara. 

Topic  4:  The  Object  of  Seeing 

Owing  to  the  mention  as  an  object  of  seeing 

*T:  He  (is  meant). 

13 .  From  the  mention  as  the  object  of  the  act  of  seeing 
(ikfaria),  it  follows  that  the  supreme  Self  is  meant. 

Doubt :  Starting  with  the  sentence,  “O  Satyakama,  this  very 
Brahman  that  is  (known  as)  the  inferior  and  superior,  is  but 
this  Om.  Therefore  the  illumined  soul  attains  either  of  the  two 
through  this  means  (or  symbol)  alone”  (Pr.  V.  2),  it  is  stated, 
“Again,  anyone  who  meditates  on  the  supreme  Puru$a  (all- 
pervading  entity)  with  the  help  of  this  very  syllable  Om>  as 
possessed  of  three  letters,  becomes  unified  in  the  sun,  consisting 
of  light.  He  is  lifted  up  to  the  world  of  Brahman  (Hiraijya- 
garbha)  by  the  Soma  mantras ”  (Pr.  V.  5).  The  doubt  arises 
whether  in  this  sentence  the  meditation  on  the  supreme  Brah¬ 
man  or  the  inferior  Brahman  is  enjoined;  for  the  topic  is  started 
with,  “attains  either  of  the  two  through  this  means  alone”,  and 
both  are  relevant. 

Opponent :  Now  then,  the  conclusion  is  that  it  is  the  inferior 
Brahman. 

Why? 

Because  in  the  text,  “He  enters  into  the  sun  consisting  of 
12 


178  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iii.  13 

light,  he  is  lifted  up  to  the  world  of  Brahman  by  the  Sama 
mantras ”  (ibid.),  a  result,  limited  in  space,  is  vouched  for  the 
knower  of  that  Brahman.  It  is  not  reasonable  that  the  knower  of 
the  supreme  Brahman  should  attain  a  spatially  limited  result, 
inasmuch  as  the  supreme  Brahman  is  omnipresent. 

Objection  :  On  the  assumption  that  the  inferior  Brahman  is 
meant,  does  not  the  qualification  “the  supreme  Puru$a”  (ibid.) 
become  inappropriate? 

Opponent :  This  creates  no  difficulty,  for  in  comparison  with 
the  gross  body  (of  Virat),  Hiraijyagarbha  (the  inferior  Brahman) 
is  justly  higher. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  said:  The  supreme 
Brahman  Itself  is  taught  here  for  meditation. 

Why? 

Because  the  object  of  iksana  is  mentioned.  lk$ana  means 
seeing.  And  \k$ati-karma  means  the  object  covered  by  the  act 
of  seeing.  The  Puru$a  that  is  to  be  meditated  on  is  presented 
in  the  complementary  portion  of  the  passage  as  an  object  of 
seeing:  “From  this  total  mass  of  creatures  (i.e.  Hiranyagarhha), 
he  sees  the  supreme  Puru$a  that  penetrates  everything  and  is 
higher  than  the  higher  (Hiraijyagarbha)”  (Pr.  V.  5).  Of  the 
two  acts  of  seeing  and  meditating,  the  object  of  meditation 
may  even  be  an  unreal  thing;  for  a  fanciful  thing  may  as  well 
be  the  content  of  meditation;  but  in  this  world,  the  content 
of  seeing  is  constituted  by  a  real  thing.  Therefore  we  under¬ 
stand  that  it  is  the  supreme  Self  Itself,  forming  the  content 
of  full  realization,  that  is  mentioned  as  the  object  of  ikfana.  And 
that  very  Self  whose  identity  is  revealed  by  the  Upani$adic 
terms — “the  Supreme”,  “all-pervading  Entity” — is  presented  here 
as  the  object  of  meditation.10 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  supreme  Puru§a  mentioned  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  meditation,  whereas  the  “higher  than  higher”  is 
mentioned  in  connection  with  the  seeing?  So  how  can  the  one 
be  recognized  as  identified  with  the  other  in  another  context? 

10  So  it  cannot  be  considered  that  the  object  of  meditation  is  Hiranya- 
garbha  and  the  object  of  seeing  is  Purusa  (which  word  means  either 
the  “All-pervasive  Entity”  or  the  “Entity  residing  in  this  city  of  the 
heart”). 


.  iii.  13  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  179 

Vedantin  :  The  answer  is  this:  As  to  that,  the  two  terms, 
upreme  (para)  and  Puru$a  are  common  to  both  the  texts 
about  seeing  and  meditation).  And  it  cannot  be  said  that  the 
erm,  “total  mass  of  creatures  ( jivaghana )”  alludes  to  the 
upreme  all-pervading  entity  that  is  relevant  and  is  meant  for 
neditation,  in  which  case  alone  this  other  all-pervading  entity 
Puru$a)  that  is  to  be  seen  can  be  “higher  than  that  high  one”. 

Opponent :  Who  is  it  then  that  is  mentioned  by  the  term, 
total  mass  of  creatures”? 

Vedantin  :  The  answer  is:  A  mass  is  a  formation  (like  a 
□mp  of  salt);  a  formation  constituting  an  individual  being  is 
his  “total  mass  of  creatures”.  By  the  term  “total  mass  of 
reatures”  is  meant  a  limited  manifestation  of  the  supreme 
lelf  in  the  likeness  of  an  individual  being  (viz  Hiraflyagarbha) 
vbich.  is  comparable  to  a  lump  of  salt.  And  this  is  conjured  up 
>y  limiting  adjuncts,  and  it  is  higher  than  the  sense-objects  and 
he  senses. 

(About  the  meaning  of  “He  sees  the  supreme  Puru$a,  higher 
han  the  higher  jivaghana”)  someone  else  says:  By  the  term 
Ivaghana  (lit.  a  mass  of  creatures)  is  meant  here  the  world  of 
Irahman  that  is  higher  than  the  other  worlds  and  is  indicated 
n  the  immediately  preceding  sentence,  “By  the  Soma  mantras 
le  is  lifted  to  the  world  of  Brahman”  (ibid.).  The  world  of 
Jrahman  can  be  a  mass  of  creatures  (by  a  transference  of 
:pithet) ,  because  all  the  individual  beings  delimited  by  their 
enses  become  united  in  Hiraoyagarbha,  inhabiting  the  world  of 
Jrahman  and  identifying  Himself  with  the  totality  of  organs. 
Therefore  it  is  understood  that  the  supreme  Self  that  is  trans- 
rendental  to  that  world  and  is  the  object  of  “seeing”,  is  also 
he  object  of  “meditation”.  The  epithet  “supreme  all-pervading 
:ntity”  becomes  appropriate  on  the  acceptance  of  the  supreme 
ielf  alone,  for  the  supreme  Self  alone  can  be  the  supreme  all- 
>ervading  entity,  beyond  which  there  can  be  nothing  else,  as 
tated  in  another  Upani§ad,  “There  is  nothing  higher  than  Puru$a 
'the  all-pervading  entity).  He  is  the  culmination,  He  is  the 
lighest  goal”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  11).  When  the  Upani$ad  makes  a  dis- 
inction  by  saying,  “This  very  Brahman,  that  is  known  as  the 
nferior  and  the  superior,  is  but  this  Om”  (Pr.  V.  2),  and  adds 


180  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  15 

just  after  this  that  the  supreme  Puru$a  is  to  be  meditated  on  with 
the  help  of  Om,  it  makes  us  understand  that  the  supreme  Puru$a 
is  none  other  than  the  supreme  Brahman.  The  declaration  of  the 
result,  viz  freedom  from  sin  as  contained  in,  “As  a  snake  becomes 
freed  from  its  slough,  exactly  in  a  similar  way  he  becomes 
freed  from  sin”  (Pr.  V.  5),  indicates  that  the  supreme  Self  is 
the  object  of  meditation  here.  As  for  the  objection  that  one 
who  meditates  on  the  supreme  Self  can  have  no  spatially 
limited  result,  our  answer  is  this:  The  result  vouchsafed  for 
one  meditating  on  Brahman  with  the  help  of  Om,  as  consti¬ 
tuted  by  three  letters,  is  the  attainment  of  the  world  of  Brah¬ 
man,  and  the  emergence  subsequently  of  complete  realization 
by  stages.  In  this  way  this  is  meant  for  leading  to  emancipation 
by  stages,  so  that  there  is  nothing  faulty. 

Topic  5:  Dahara  (The  Small  Space) 

^  »*YII 

The  small  space  (in  the  heart)  owing  to  subse¬ 

quent  reasons. 

14.  The  small  space  (dahara  HkZia)  is  Brahman,  on  account  of 
the  subsequent  reasons. 

Doubt :  In  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad  it  is  stated,  “Then  in 
the  small  palace  of  the  shape  of  a  lotus  that  stands  in  this  city 
of  Brahman,  there  is  a  small  space.  That  which  is  inside  that11 
is  to  be  sought  for,  that  is  surely  to  be  inquired  into”  etc. 
(VIII.  i.  1).  Now  the  doubt  arises  with  regard  to  the  small 
space,  heard  of  in  this  sentence  as  existing  within  the  small 
lotus  of  the  heart,  as  to  whether  it  is  the  material  space  (called 
subtle  ether),  or  the  individual  Self  identified  with  the  intellect, 
or  the  supreme  Self. 

Why  should  the  doubt  arise? 

n  Tastmn ,  inside  that,  may  mean  in  the  heart,  or  in  the  individual 
soul,  or  in  the  material  space;  in  all  cases  Brahman  is  the  Entity  inside. 
The  opponent  construes  it  thus.  The  Vedantin  says  that  the  small  space 
Itself  is  Brahman. 


Liu.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  - BHA§YA  181 

Owing  to  the  presence  of  the  words  akasa  and  city  of 
Brahman.  Since  this  word  akasa  is  seen  to  be  used  in  the 
senses  of  both  material  space  and  the  supreme  Self,  there¬ 
fore  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  material  space  or  the 
supreme  Self  should  be  the  small  space  here.  Again  the  doubt 
arises:  Is  some  individual  soul  meant  by  the  word  Brahman, 
occurring  in  the  phrase  “city  of  Brahman”,  and  is  this  city 
called  the  city  of  Brahman  owing  to  its  being  owned  by  that 
individual?  Or  is  the  city  called  so  because  it  belongs  to  the 
supreme  Brahman?  That  being  the  case,  the  doubt  arises  as  to 
who  among  the  two— the  individual  Self  and  the  supreme  Self 
— is  the  owner  of  the  city  and  is  (referred  to  as)  the  small 
space. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at  is  that 
the  material  space  is  meant  here  by  the  term  small  (space),  for 
that  is  the  conventional  meaning;  and  that  space  is  called  small 
( dahara )  in  relation  to  the  small  place  where  it  subsists.  Again 
the  relationship,  as  between  the  illustration  and  the  thing  illus¬ 
trated,  that  is  established  (here)  between  two  portions  of  space 
by  dividing  it  into  the  internal  and  the  external  in  the  text, 
“The  space  that  is  within  this  heart  is  of  the  same  magnitude  as 
the  space  outside”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  3),  is  possible  for  the  material 
space  alone.  Within  that  space  can  be  “included  heaven,  earth, 
and  the  rest”  (ibid.);  for  the  material  space,  in  its  characteristic 
of  providing  space,  is  but  one.  Or  the  conclusion  may  be  that 
the  individual  soul  is  the  small  space,  for  the  term  used  is  the 
city  of  Brahman.  This  body  that  is  the  city  of  the  individual 
soul  is  called  the  city  of  Brahman,  because  it  is  earned  by  the 
soul’s  own  work,  the  soul  being  called  Brahman  in  a  figurative 
sense.  For  the  supreme  Brahman  can  have  neither  identity  with 
nor  ownership  of  the  body.  Now  the  owner  of  a  city,  as  for 
instance  a  king,  is  seen  to  inhabit  a  portion  of  the  city.  And 
the  individual  soul  is  limited  by  the  mind  and  the  mind  is 
generally  seated  in  the  heart.  Therefore  this  existence  within 
the  heart  must  be  a  fact  in  the  case  of  the  soul  alone.  The 
smallness  too  is  appropriate  for  it,  since  it  is  compared  (in  the 
Upani$ad)  to  the  tip  of  a  goading  stick  (Sv.  V.  8).  And  the 
comparison  with  space  etc.  is  possible  when  the  intention  is 


182  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  14 

to  speak  of  it  as  identical  with  Brahman.  Besides,  the  small 
space  is  not  spoken  of  in  the  Upani$ad  as  the  thing  to  be  sought 
for  or  to  be  known;  for  in  the  clause,  “That  which  is  inside 
that”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  1),  the  little  space  is  presented  as  the  abode 
of  that  (supreme  Self)  which  is  inside.12 

Vedantin :  Hence  we  offer  this  answer:  The  supreme  Lord 
alone  can  be  small  Space  here;  and  neither  the  material  space 
nor  the  individual  soul  can  be  so. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  subsequent  reasons”,  because  of  the 
reasons  occurring  in  the  complementary  portion  of  the  passage. 
Thus  with  regard  to  the  small  space  that  is  to  be  sought  for, 
the  objection  is  raised:  “Should  anyone  ask  him  (i.e.  the 
teacher),  What  is  it  that  exists  here  that  has  to  be  sought  for 
and  that  has  to  be  known?’”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  2).  And  then  this 
text  occurs  by  way  of  an  answer:  “He  (i.e.  the  teacher)  should 
say,  ‘The  Space  that  is  within  the  heart  has  the  same  magni¬ 
tude  as  the  space  outside.  Both  heaven  and  earth  are  verily 
included  within  it’”  etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  3).  Lest  the  Space  in 
the  text  should  be  understood  to  be  small  owing  to  the  small¬ 
ness  of  the  lotus  (of  the  heart),  the  teacher  repudiates  that 
smallness  through  a  comparison  with  the  familiar  material 
space,  which  fact  leads  us  to  understand  that  the  teacher 
thereby  denies  the  small  Space  to  be  the  material  space.  Though 
the  word  space  conventionally  means  the  material  space,  still 
the  suspicion  about  its  (i.e.  the  small  space)  being  the  material 
space  is  ruled  out,  since  the  material  space  itself  cannot  be 
adopted  as  a  standard  of  comparison  for  itself. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  even  the  same  space  can  be 
adopted  as  the  standard  of  comparison  and  the  thing  compared 
by  an  assumption  of  internal  and  external  difference? 

Vedantin :  This  cannot  be  so.  To  resort  to  a  fanciful 
difference  betrays  a  failure  to  discover  any  other  way  out. 
Besides,  even  for  a  man  who  would  explain  the  relation  between 
the  thing  compared  and  the  standard  of  comparison  by  fancy- 

“Or  the  meaning  is:  Since  the  object  of  being  searched  for,  mentioned 
in  “That  which  is  inside”  etc.,  is  taken  to  imply  the  supreme  Self,  dahara 
cannot  mean  Brahman. 


183 


I.  iii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 

ing  an  imaginary  difference  between  them,  the  internal  space 
cannot  have  the  vastness  of  the  external  space  since  the  former 
is  limited. 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  impossible  even  for  the  supreme  Lord 
to  have  the  magnitude  of  material  space,  since  another  Vedic 
text  declares,  “Greater  than  space”  (S.B.  X.  vi.  3.2)? 

Vedantin  :  That  is  no  fault,  for  the  sentence  is  meant  to  deny 
the  smallness  arising  from  the  delimitation  by  the  lotus  (of  the 
heart).  It  is  not  meant  to  affirm  that  much  of  magnitude  only; 
for  the  sentence  will  lose  its  unity  of  purport  if  it  should  mean 
both  (magnitude  and  negation  of  limitation).  Again,  a  portion 
of  space,  fancied  to  be  different  and  contained  within  the 
lotus,  can  never  include  heaven,  earth,  etc.  within  it.  And  the 
characteristics  of  being  the  Self  and  free  from  sin  etc.  that  are 
mentioned  in  the  text,  “This  is  the  Self  free  from  sin,  old  age, 
death,  sorrow,  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  possessed  of  true  desire 
and  true  resolve”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  5),  are  not  possible  for  the 
material  space.  Although  the  word  Self  applies  to  the  individual 
soul  as  well,  yet  this  possibility  for  the  soul  is  overruled  by 
other  reasons.  The  smallness  created  by  the  enveloping  lotus 
cannot  be  denied  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  for  it  is 
delimited  by  conditioning  factors  and  it  is  compared  to  the  tip 
of  a  goading  stick  (Sv.  V.  8). 

Opponent :  All-pervasiveness  can  be  asserted  as  having  been 
intended  to  be  spoken  of  for  the  individual  soul  since  the  real 
intention  is  to  speak  of  it  later  on  as  non-different  from 
Brahman. 

Vedantin :  Then  it  is  reasonable  to  assert  all-pervasiveness  etc. 
as  having  been  directly  intended  to  be  spoken  of  for  that  very 
Brahman  in  identity  with  which  the  all-pervasiveness  etc.  are 
sought  to  be  declared  about  the  individual  soul. 

It  was  also  argued  that,  since  in  the  term  “the  city  of 
Brahman”,  the  city  is  suggestively  determined  by  the  individual 
soul,  this  soul  should  be  accepted  as  the  master  of  the  city,  who, 
just  like  a  king,  inhabits  a  part  of  that  city.  To  this  we  say 
that  this  body  is  spoken  of  as  the  city  of  Brahman  just  because 
it  belongs  to  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself,  that  being  the  primary 
meaning  of  the  term  Brahman.  Brahman  has  a  relation  even 


184  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  14 

with  this  city,  it  being  the  place  for  Its  realization  as  is  men¬ 
tioned  in  such  Upani$adic  passages  as,  “From  this  total  mass  of 
creatures  (that  Hiranyagarbha  is)  he  (the  aspirant)  sees  the 
supreme  Puru§a  that  has  entered  into  every  body  and  is  higher 
than  the  higher  (Hiranyagarbha)”  (Pr.  V.  5),  “He  that  is  this 
Puru$a  exists  within  the  hearts  in  all  the  bodies”  (Bj\  II.  v.  18). 
Or  the  idea  may  be  that  it  is  in  the  city  of  the  individual  soul 
itself  that  Brahman  is  perceived  directly,  just  as  Vi$iju  is  on  a 
sdlagrama  (symbol).  Again  the  text  says,  “Just  as  the  results 
of  work  get  exhausted  here,  so  also  the  results  of  good  works 
get  exhausted  in  the  other  world”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  6),  which 
expresses  the  finitude  of  the  results  of  work;  and  then  it  is 
said,  “Again  those  who  depart  after  knowing  here  the  Self 
and  these  true  desires  (existing  in  It)  get  freedom  of  move¬ 
ment  in  all  the  worlds”  (ibid.),  which  reveals  the  infinite  result 
accruing  from  the  knowledge  of  the  small  Space  under  dis¬ 
cussion.  Thereby  the  text  suggests  that  the  small  Space  is 
Brahman. 

It  was  also  stated  that  the  small  Space  is  not  heard  of  in  the 
passage  as  an  object  to  be  sought  for  or  to  be  known,  it  having 
been  presented  as  a  receptacle  of  that  (supreme  Self)  which  is 
inside.  In  answer  to  this  we  say:  If  Space  be  not  presented  as 
an  object  to  be  sought  for,  then  the  revelation  of  the  nature 
of  Space  in,  “The  Space  that  is  within  the  heart  is  of  the  same 
magnitude  as  the  space  outside”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  3),  becomes 
inappropriate. 

Opponent :  Is  not  even  this  mentioned  by  way  of  revealing 
the  existence  of  something  inside?  For  the  objection  is  first 
raised  thus:  “Should  anyone  ask  him,  ‘The  small  palace  that 
there  is  of  the  shape  of  a  small  lotus  within  this  city  of  Brahman 
and  the  small  space  that  there  is  within  that  lotus,  what  can  it 
be  that  exists  there  and  that  has  to  be  sought  for  and  known?’  ” 
(Ch.  VIII.  i.  2).  And  then  in  the  course  of  meeting  the  objec¬ 
tion,  the  illustration  of  space  is  first  resorted  to  and  then  it  is 
shown  that  heaven,  earth,  etc.  exist  within  it. 

Vedantin :  This  is  not  so;  for  if  that  had  been  the  case,  the 
purport  would  have  been  that  the  heaven,  earth,  etc.,  which 
exist  within,  are  to  be  sought  for  and  known.  But  the  comple- 


I.  iii.  15]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  185 

mentary  portion  of  the  passage  does  not  conform  to  this  inter¬ 
pretation.  For  there  the  Space,  that  is  the  receptacle,  serving 
as  the  repository  of  heaven,  earth,  etc.,  is  alluded  to  in,  “Within 
this  are  included  all  desirable  things.  This  is  the  Self  free 
from  sin”  etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  5);  and  then  in  the  passage,  “Those 
who  depart  without  realizing  here  the  Self  and  these  true 
desires”  etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  6),  the  concluding  portion  of  the 
text  shows,  by  using  ca  in  the  sense  of  “and”,  that  the  things 
to  be  known  are  the  Self,  that  is  the  repository  of  the  desires, 
and  the  desirable  things  that  are  held  therein  (in  the  Self). 
Accordingly,  it  is  understood  that  even  in  the  beginning  of  the 
text,  the  small  Space,  seated  in  the  lotus  of  the  heart,  is  spoken 
of  as  the  entity  to  be  known  together  with  the  earth  etc.,  as 
well  as  the  true  desires  included  within  It.  And  in  accordance 
with  the  reasons  adduced,  this  must  be  the  supreme  Lord. 

*rfa-3f®<l*4IHkFrom  the  facts  of  going  and  the  use  of  the  word; 
^PTT  likewise  (it ls)  seen;  indicating  mark  ^  as  well 
(is  present). 

15.  From  the  facts  of  going  and  the  use  of  the  word  ( Brahma - 
loka)y  (it  follows  that  the  small  Space  is  Brahman);  likewise  it 
is  seen  in  other  Upani$ads,  and  an  indicatory  mark  is  also  present. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  small  Space  is  the  supreme  Lord,  on 
account  of  the  subsequent  reasons.  Those  very  subsequent  reasons 
are  being  elaborated  now.  The  small  Space  is  the  supreme  Lord 
for  this  further  reason  that  in  the  text,  complementary  to  the 
passage  relating  to  the  small  Space,  occurs  this  sentence,  “These 
creatures,  though  going  everyday  to  this  Brahmaloka  (the  world 
that  is  Brahman),  do  not  know  It”  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  2),  where  the 
act  of  going  and  the  term  used  furnish  a  proof  of  the  supreme 
Lord  alone.  In  that  sentence,  the  small  Space  under  consider 
tion  is  referred  to  by  the  phrase  Brahmaloka,  and  then  it  is 
related  that  the  individual  souls,  mentioned  by  the  term  crea¬ 
tures,  approach  towards  It;  thereby  it  is  shown  that  the  small 
Space  is  Brahman.  Similarly  in  other  Upani§adic  texts,  we  come 


186  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [Liu.  15 

across  the  approach  of  creatures  towards  Brahman,  as  for 
instance  in,  “O  amiable  one,  then  (during  sleep),  the  individual 
becomes  merged  in  Existence  (Brahman)”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1).  In 
common  parlance  also,  it  is  said  with  regard  to  a  man  in  deep 
sleep,  “He  has  become  Brahman,  he  has  gone  to  the  state  of 
Brahman”.  Similarly  the  term  Brahmaloka,  used  there  with 
reference  to  the  small  Space  under  consideration,  rules  out  the 
assumptions  about  the  individual  soul  and  the  material  space, 
and  makes  us  understand  the  term  small  Space  in  the  sense  of 
Brahman. 

Opponent :  May  not  tht  term  Brahmaloka  mean  the  world  of 
Brahma  (Prajapati)? 

Vedant'm :  It  may,  if  the  compound  Brahmaloka  is  explained 
as  having  been  formed  with  an  implied  sixth  case-ending  (mean¬ 
ing  the  world  of  Brahman);  but  if  it  is  explained  in  the  sense 
of  apposition,  viz  “the  world  that  is  Brahman”,  then  it  will  lead 
us  to  the  supreme  Brahman  alone.  And  this  very  fact  of  repair¬ 
ing  to  Brahmaloka  everyday  is  an  indication  that  the  (com¬ 
pound)  word  Brahmaloka  is  to  be  explained  in  the  sense  of 
apposition;  for  it  cannot  be  imagined  that  the  creatures  go  every¬ 
day  to  the  world  of  Brahma  otherwise  called  Satya-loka. 

^  And  owing  to  holding  in  place;  3^  JTfjpT:  the  glory 
OTflteET :  being  noticed  as  pertaining  to  this  One. 

16.  And  owing  to  the  fact  of  holding  (the  worlds)  in  place , 
(the  small  Space  must  be  God);  for  this  glory  is  noticed  (in 
other  texts)  as  pertaining  to  Him. 

Also  from  the  fact  of  holding  (the  worlds)  in  place,  it  fol¬ 
lows  that  the  small  Space  is  the  supreme  Lord. 

How? 

The  start  is  made  with,  “within  this  is  a  small  Space”  (Ch. 
VIII.  i.  1);  and  then  after  presenting  the  analogy  of  (material) 
space,  everything  is  said  to  be  included  in  that  (small)  Space. 
With  regard  to  this  very  entity,  again,  the  word  Self  is  used 
and  It  is  taught  to  be  endowed  with  such  characteristics  as 


I.iii.  17] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


187 


freedom  from  sin  and  so  on.  And  lastly  that  self-same  Space, 
which  still  continues  to  be  the  subject-matter  of  the  Upa- 
nisadic  topic,  is  mentioned  in,  “Then,  again,  that  which  is  the  Self 
is  a  dam,  a  reservoir  (an  impounder)  to  prevent  the  worlds  from 
getting  mixed  up”  (Ch.  VIII.  iv.  1).  In  that  passage,  the  word 
Vidhrti  means  an  impounder  (which  holds  in  position),  it  being 
placed  in  apposition  with  the  word  Self  (which  is  in  the  nomi¬ 
native  case);  for  the  suffix  ktic  is  used,  according  to  grammar,  in 
the  nominative  sense.  As  a  dam  is  an  impounder  of  an  expanse  of 
water,  so  that  the  valuable  cultivable  fields  may  not  lose  their 
demarcations,  so  this  Self  is  a  dam,  a  reservoir,  to  prevent  these 
worlds,  divided  according  to  the  different  planes,  viz  the  bodily 
plane  etc.,  and  the  castes,  colours,  etc.,  from  getting  inter¬ 
mixed.13  Thus  it  is  shown  that  this  small  Space  under  considera¬ 
tion  has  the  glory  of  holding  (the  worlds)  in  position.  And  this 
glory  is  known  from  another  text  to  pertain  to  the  supreme 
Lord  alone:  “Under  the  mighty  rule  of  this  Immutable,  O 
Gargl,  the  sun  and  moon  are  held  in  their  positions”  etc.  (Bf. 
III.  viii.  9).  Similarly  in  other  passages,  that  definitely  speak  of 
the  supreme  Lord,  it  is  heard,  “It  is  the  Lord  of  all,  It  is  the 
ruler  of  all  beings,  It  is  the  dam  that  serves  as  the  boundary  to 
keep  the  different  worlds  apart”  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  22).  Accordingly, 
on  account  of  this  fact  of  holding  in  place,  this  small  Space  must 
be  the  supreme  Lord. 


27.  And  because  of  familiar  use. 

For  this  additional  reason,  it  is  the  supreme  Lord  that  is 
spoken  of  by  the  text,  “Within  this  is  a  small  Space”  (Ch.  VIII. 
i.  1):  The  word  space  is  well  known  to  denote  the  supreme 
Lord,  as  is  evident  from  such  uses  as,  “That  which  is  known  as 
Space  is  the  manifester  of  name  and  form”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv), 

18  Vidhrti  in  the  Upanisad  means  an  impounder  or  supporter.  Dhrti 
in  the  aphorism,  however,  means  holding  together  or  supporting,  the 
suffix  here  being  ktin,  imparting  a  cognate  sense  in  the  feminine  gender 
to  the  root.  Dam  (setu)  implies  the  idea  of  not  allowing  intermixture, 
while  vidhrti  implies  keeping  in  position. 


188  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BH A§YA  [I.  iii.  17 

“All  these  beings  surely  originate  from  Space”  (Ch.  I.  ix.  1). 
But  the  word  space  is  never  found  in  use  in  the  sense  of  the 
individual  soul.  And  although  the  material  space  is  very  often 
meant  by  that  word,  still  it  was  pointed  out  by  us  that  it  cannot 
be  accepted  because  of  such  reasons  as  the  impossibility  of  the 
same  thing  becoming  the  illustration  and  the  thing  illustrated. 

Owing  to  the  allusion  to  the  other  he  (is 
meant),  if  such  be  the  argument,  not  so, 

owing  to  impossibility. 

18.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  other  one  (viz  the  individual  soul) 
should  be  the  small  Space,  since  it  is  alluded  to  (at  the  end), 
then  not  so,  for  that  is  impossible . 

Opponent :  If  on  the  strength  of  the  complementary  portion, 
the  small  Space  is  understood  to  mean  the  supreme  Lord,  then 
the  other,  viz  the  individual  soul  also,  is  alluded  to  in  the  com¬ 
plementary  portion  in,  “He  said,  ‘Now  then,  that  is  the  Self 
which  is  this  serene  one  ( samprasUda )  that  raises  itself  up  from 
this  body,  and  realizing  itself  as  the  supreme  Light,  attains  its 
own  real  nature.14  This  is  the  Self’  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  4).  Since  the 
word  samprasada  (complete  serenity)  is  used  in  another  Upa- 
ni$adic  passage  in  the  sense  of  deep  sleep,  it  can  call  to  mind  the 
soul  in  that  state  in  the  text  under  consideration,  but  not  any¬ 
thing  else.  Similarly,  it  is  possible  for  the  individual  soul  alone, 
existing  in  the  body,  to  rise  up  from  the  body.  Just  as  air  etc., 
existing  in  space,  can  emerge  from  space,  similar  is  the  case  here. 
Moreover,  though  the  word  space  is  not  familiarly  used  in  the 
world  in  the  sense  of  the  supreme  Lord,  still  in  such  texts  as, 
“That  which  is  called  Space,  is  surely  the  manifester  of  name 
and  form”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv),  the  word  is  accepted  as  standing 

“The  Vedantic  explanation  of  this  text  is:  The  man  of  knowledge 
completely  detaches  himself  from  the  assemblage  of  body  and  senses  and 
realizes  the  detached  Self  as  Brahman,  which  is  his  true  nature.  Thereby 
he  attains  that  supreme  Light,  his  knowledge  and  attainment  being  the 
same. 


Liu.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  189 

for  the  supreme  Lord  because  of  its  association  with  the  char¬ 
acteristics  of  God.  In  a  similar  way,  it  can  be  used  for  the 
individual  soul  as  well.  Accordingly,  from  the  fact  that  the 
other  (namely  individual  soul)  is  alluded  to  (at  the  end  of  the 
text),  it  follows  that  it  is  the  individual  soul  that  is  referred  to 
in  die  passage,  “The  small  Space  that  there  is  within  it”  (Ch. 
VIII.  i.  1). 

Ved&ntin:  This  cannot  be  so. 

Why? 

“Because  this  is  impossible",  for  the  individual  soul,  identify¬ 
ing  itself  with  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the  intellect,  cannot  be 
compared  with  space;  nor  can  such  qualities  as  freedom  from 
sin  and  so  on  be  possible  for  something  identifying  itself  with 
the  limitations  of  conditioning  factors.  This  was  elaborated 
under  the  first  aphorism  (I.  iii.  14).  But  the  subject  is  mooted 
again  for  removing  additional  doubts.  Another  aphorism  also 
will  be  advanced  later:  “And  the  allusion  is  meant  for  a  different 
purpose”18  (I.  iii.  20). 

HUH 

(Space  is  the  soul)  owing  to  subsequent  reference, 

if  this  be  the  objection,  that  is  the  revealed  real 

nature,  3  rather. 

19.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  small  Space  is  the  individual  soul , 
because  of  the  subsequent  reference  to  it  (in  the  same  chapter), 
then  we  say :  Rather  it  is  spoken  of  there  in  its  own  revealed 
nature. 

Opponent :  The  assumption  about  the  individual  soul,  that 
had  arisen  from  the  allusion  to  some  one  other  than  Brahman, 
has  been  dismissed  on  the  ground  of  impossibility.  Here  again, 
“on  the  strength  of  the  subsequent  references” — on  the  strength 
of  the  utterance  of  Prajapati — that  very  assumption  about  the 
individual  soul  is  being  revived  like  the  resuscitation  of  the  dead 
by  the  sprinkling  of  nectar.  In  that  very  context  (Ch.  VIII)  the 


uviz  to  draw  attention  to  Brahman  to  which  the  soul  repairs  in  sleep. 


190  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iil.  19 

assertion  started  with  is  that  the  Self  possessed  of  the  attributes 
of  freedom  from  sin  and  so  on,  as  stated  in,  “The  Self  that  is 
free  from  sin”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  is  to  be  sought  for  and  known; 
and  then  by  saying,  “This  Puru$a  that  is  seen  in  the  eye  is  the 
Self”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  4),  the  witnessing  individual  soul,  seated  in 
the  eye,  is  pointed  out  as  the  Self.  TTien  after  alluding  to  that 
very  individual  soul  again  and  again,  by  saying,  “I  shall  explain 
this  very  one  to  you  over  again”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  3-8),  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  is  explained  under  varying  conditions  (by  Prajapati  to 
Indra)  in  the  texts,  “The  one  that  moves  about  in  dream,  adored 
(by  objects  conjured  up  by  past  tendencies),  is  the  Self”  (Ch. 
VIII.  x.  1),  and  “At  the  time  when  one  sleeps  in  such  a  way 
that  one  gets  all  one’s  senses  withdrawn  and  hence  becomes 
wholly  serene,  and  does  not  see  dreams,16  then  that  is  the 
Self’17  (Ch.  VIII.  xi.  1).  For  that  individual  soul  are  shown 
such  attributes  as  freedom  from  sin  and  so  on  in,  “This  one  is 
immortal,  fearless,  this  one  is  Brahman”  (ibid.).  Again,  after 
the  perception  of  some  defect  (by  Indra)  in  the  state  of  sleep, 
as  stated  (by  him)  in,  “Alas,  this  (sleeping)  man  does  not 
certainly  know  himself  now  (in  sleep)  as  1  am  this’,  nor  does 
he  know  those  beings!  (But  he  attains  annihilation,  as  it  were. 
I  do  not  find  anything  desirable  here)”  (ibid.),  (in  reply) 
Prajapati  first  says,  “I  shall  explain  this  very  one  to  you  over 
again,  and  not  anything  other  than  this”  (Ch.  VIII.  xi.  3);  then 
he  denounces  all  association  with  the  body;  and  lastly  he  says, 
“This  samprasada  (wholly  serene  one)  raises  itself  up  from  this 
body  and  realizing  the  supreme  light,  attains  its  own  real  nature. 
It  is  the  highest  Puru$a”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3),  where  Prajapati 
shows  that  the  individual  soul  itself,  that  has  risen  up  from  the 
body,  is  the  highest  Purusa.  Therefore  the  attributes  of  the 
supreme  Lord  are  possible  in  the  individual  being.  Accordingly, 
the  individual  soul  is  spoken  of  in  the  text,  “The  small  Space 
inside  that”. 

Vedantin  :  Should  anybody  argue  like  this,  then  one  should 

16  Reduces  the  universe  to  mere  nescience. 

w Prajfia  (individual  soul)  in  a  causal  body  and  witnessing  it  through 
its  own  consciousness.  It  is  the  witness  by  virtue  of  imparting  existence 
and  sentience  to  others;  but  it  is  not  free,  since  ignorance  still  persists. 


I.iii.  19]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  191 

tell  him:  (Even  there)  “the  individual  soul  is  rather  spoken  of 
in  its  own  revealed  nature”.  The  word  “rather”  is  used  for 
repudiating  the  opponent,  the  idea  implied  being  that  even  on 
the  strength  of  the  subsequent  text,  the  assumption  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul  is  not  possible  here. 

Why? 

Because  even  there  the  individual  soul  is  intended  to  be 
presented  in  its  real  revealed  nature.  “The  individual  soul  in  its 
own  revealed  nature”  means  the  soul  of  which  the  true  nature 
has  become  manifest,  the  term  “individual  soul”  being  retained 
even  after  enlightenment,  in  continuation  of  the  earlier  (conven¬ 
tional)  uses  in  the  text.  The  sense  conveyed  is  this:  The  Witness, 
suggested  through  the  word  “eye”,  is  first  pointed  out  by  the 
text,  “He  that  is  in  the  eye”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  4).  Then  in  the 
Brahmaija,  presenting  the  analogy  of  the  water  in  a  plate18 
(Ch.  VIII.  viii),  this  very  one  is  freed  from  the  conception  of 
identity  with  the  body.  And  this  very  one  is  repeatedly  alluded 
to  for  the  purpose  of  explanation  with  the  utterance,  “I  shall 
explain  this  very  one  to  you”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  3).  Then  after 
presenting  the  states  of  dream  and  deep  sleep,  it  is  said,  “realiz¬ 
ing  the  supreme  Light,  attains  its  own  real  nature”  (Ch.  VIII. 
xii.  3),  where  this  individual  soul  is  explained  in  its  true  nature, 
which  is  Brahman,  but  not  in  its  nature  as  an  individual.  The 
supreme  Light  that  is  mentioned  in  the  Upanisad  as  the  thing 
to  be  realized  is  the  supreme  Brahman.  That  Brahman  has  such 
characteristics  as  freedom  from  sin  and  so  on;  and  that  is  the 
real  nature  of  the  individual  being,  as  shown  in  such  texts  as, 
“That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi),  but  not  so  is  the  other 
nature  (as  that  is)  conjured  up  by  limiting  adjuncts.  The  indi¬ 
viduality  of  the  individual  persists  so  long  as,  like  the  elimina¬ 
tion  of  the  false  idea  of  a  man  superimposed  on  a  stump  of  a 
tree,  he  does  not  eradicate  ignorance  expressing  itself  as  the 

“Prajapati  said  to  Indra  and  Virocana,  “You  ask  me  about  whatever 
you  do  not  understand  regarding  your  Self  after  looking  at  yourself  in 
a  plate  full  of  water.”  After  this  had  been  done,  Indra  argued,  that  a 
thing,  casting  a  reflection,  is  itself  subject  to  growth  and  decay,  as  was 
evident  from  the  reflection  itself  presenting  the  changes  in  the  body. 
Thus  the  body  could  not  be  the  Self.  Prajapati  confirmed  this. 


192  BRAHMA -S0TRA-BHA5YA  [LiiLl» 

world  of  duality  and  does  not  know  that  Self  as  UI  am  Brahman” 
— the  Self  that  has  no  change  and  is  eternal  and  a  witness  by 
nature.  But  when  the  individual  is  roused  from  the  assemblage 
of  body,  senses,  mind,  and  intellect  by  the  Upani$ad  which 
makes  him  understand,  “You  are  not  the  assemblage  of  body, 
senses,  and  intellect,  nor  are  you  a  transmigratory  being.  What 
are  you  then?  That  which  is  truth — the  Self  of  the  nature  of 
pure  Consciousness — that  thou  art”,  then  he  realizes  the  Self 
that  has  no  change  and  is  eternal  and  a  witness  by  nature,  and 
then  that  very  individual  rises  above  its  identity  with  the  body 
and  the  rest  to  become  the  Self  Itself — unchanging,  eternal,  and 
a  witness  by  nature.  This  is  declared  in  such  Upani$adic  texts 
as,  “Anyone  who  knows  that  supreme  Brahman  becomes  Brahman 
indeed”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  9).  And  that  is  the  soul’s  supremely  real 
nature  by  virtue  of  which  it  attains  its  essential  stature  after 
rising  above  the  body. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  the  attainment  of  its  true  nature 
by  itself  be  possible  for  that  entity  which  is  unchanging  and 
eternal?  In  the  cases  of  gold  and  other  things,  whose  distinct 
characteristics  remain  unmanifest  owing  to  coverings  over  their 
real  nature  arising  from  contact  with  foreign  matters,  there  may 
be  such  a  thing  as  the  attainment  of  their  own  nature  by 
becoming  purified  by  addition  of  salts.  Similarly  in  the  case 
of  the  stars  whose  light  becomes  dimmed  in  the  daytime,  there 
may  be  an  attainment  of  their  real  nature  at  night  when  the 
dimming  factor  is  removed.  But  in  the  case  of  the  eternal  Light 
that  is  Consciousness  Itself,  there  can  be  no  overpowering  by 
anything,  since  just  like  space,  It  can  have  no  contact  with  any¬ 
thing,  and  since  this  contradicts  common  experience.  The  indi¬ 
vidual  soul’s  nature  comprises  seeing,  hearing,  thinking,  and 
knowing.  And  that  is  ever  in  evidence  as  a  patent  fact  even  for 
the  soul  that  has  not  risen  up  from  the  body.  For  all  beings 
live  and  behave  in  this  world  by  seeing,  hearing,  thinking,  and 
knowing;  otherwise  life  comes  to  a  standstill.  If  that  nature  be 
attainable  only  by  the  soul  that  has  risen  above  the  body,  then 
the  behaviour  noticed  earlier  stands  contradicted.  Hence  what 
does  this  rising  up  from  the  body  mean,  and  in  what  does  the 
attainment  of  the  real  nature  consist? 


I.  iii.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  193 

Vedantin :  In  reply  to  this  we  say:  Before  the  dawn  of  dis¬ 
criminating  knowledge,  the  individual  soul’s  nature  of  Con¬ 
sciousness,  expressing  through  seeing  etc.,  remains  mixed  up  as 
it  were,  with  the  body,  senses,  mind,  intellect,  sense-objects,  and 
sorrow  and  happiness.  Just  as  before  the  perception  of  distinc¬ 
tion,  the  transparent  whiteness,  constituting  the  real  nature  of 
a  crystal,  remains  indistinguishable,  as  it  were,  from  red,  blue, 
and  other  conditioning  factors;  but  after  the  perception  of 
distinction  through  the  valid  means  of  knowledge,  the  crystal 
in  its  latter  state  is  said  to  attain  its  true  nature  of  whiteness  and 
transparence,  though  it  was  exactly  so  even  earlier;  similarly 
in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  remaining  indistinguishably 
mixed  up  with  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the  body  etc.,  there 
springs  up  a  discriminatory  knowledge  from  the  Upani$ads 
constituting  his  rising  from  the  body  (consciousness);  and  the 
result  of  the  discriminatory  knowledge  is  the  attainment  of  the 
real  nature,  its  realization  of  its  nature  as  the  absolute  Self.  Thus 
unembodiedness  or  embodiedness  for  the  Self  follows  respect¬ 
ively  from  the  fact  of  discrimination  or  non-discrimination,  as 
stated  by  the  mantra ,  “Bodiless  in  the  midst  of  bodies”  (Ka.  I. 
ii.  22),  and  by  the  Srrqti,  “The  supreme  Self,  O  son  of  Kunti, 
neither  acts,  nor  is  affected  though  existing  in  the  body”  (Gita, 
XIII.  31),  which  mention  the  absence  of  any  such  distinction 
as  embodiedness  or  unembodiedness.  Therefore  the  individual 
soul  continuing  in  the  state  of  its  unmanifested  nature,  owing  to 
the  absence  of  discriminatory  knowledge,  is  said  to  have  its 
real  nature  manifested  when  discriminatory  knowledge  dawns. 
For  manifestation  or  non-manifestation  of  any  other  kind  is  not 
possible  for  what  is  one’s  own  nature,  just  because  it  is  intrinsic 
with  one.  Thus  the  difference  between  the  individual  soul  and 
the  supreme  Lord  springs  from  ignorance  alone,  but  not  from 
the  things  themselves,  for  both  are  equally  free  from  attach¬ 
ment  etc.  (as  well  as  partless  and  so  on)  like  space. 

Opponent :  How  again  is  this  to  be  known  thus? 

Vedantin :  Because  Prajapati  first  teaches,  “The  Being  that  is 
seen  in  the  eye”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  4),  and  then  says,  “This  is 
immortal  and  fearless.  This  is  Brahman”  (ibid.).  If  the  well- 
known  seer  in  the  eye,  who  is  thought  of  as  the  Witness,  were 
13 


194  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  19 

different  from  Brahman,  characterized  as  immortal  and  fearless, 
then  that  seer  would  not  have  been  put  in  apposition  with  the 
fearless  and  immortal  Brahman.  Nor  is  the  reflection  in  the  eye 
indicated  here  by  the  word  eye,  for  that  will  lead  to  a  prevarica¬ 
tion  on  the  part  of  Prajapati.  So  also  at  the  second  stage,  Prajapati 
told  Indra,  “This  one  that  moves  about  in  dream  receiving  the 
adoration  (of  women  and  others)  is  the  Self”  (Ch.  VIII.  x.  1). 
Here  also  none  other  than  the  Witness,  the  Being  in  the  eye, 
pointed  out  at  the  first  stage,  is  indicated;  for  the  introduction 
is  made  with  the  words,  “I  shall  explain  this  very  one  to  you 
over  again”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  3).  Moreover,  a  man  after  waking  up 
speaks  thus:  “I  saw  an  elephant  in  a  dream  today;  I  do  not  see 
it  now”.  What  he  repudiates  here  is  what  he  saw,  whereas  he 
cognizes  the  identity  of  that  very  witness  thus:  “I  myself  who 
saw  the  dream  now  see  the  things  of  the  waking  state”.  Simi¬ 
larly  at  the  third  stage,  Indra  says,  “This  one  does  not  certainly 
know  himself  now  (in  sleep)  as  ‘I  am  so  and  so’,  nor  does  he 
know  these  beings”  (Ch.  VIII.  xi.  2),  where  the  absence  of 
particularized  cognition  is  shown  in  the  state  of  sleep,  but  the 
Witness  is  not  denied.  As  for  the  statement  of  Indra,  “There  it 
undergoes  extinction,  as  it  were”  (Ch.  VIII.  xi.  1),  that  too  is 
made  with  regard  to  the  wiping  out  of  particularized  cognition, 
but  not  in  the  sense  of  the  annihilation  of  the  knower;  for 
another  Upani$ad  declares,  “For  the  knower’s  function  of 
knowing  can  never  be  lost,  because  it  is  immortal.  (But  there 
is  not  that  second  thing  separate  from  it  which  it  can  know)” 
(Bf.  IV.  iii.  30).  Similarly  at  the  fourth  stage,  Prajapati  starts 
with,  “I  shall  explain  this  very  one  to  you  over  again,  and 
nothing  different  from  it”  (Ch.  VIII.  xi.  3),  and  then  he  adds, 
“O  Maghavan  (i.e.  Indra),  this  body  is  surely  mortal”  etc. 
(VIII.  xii.  1),  by  which  elaborate  statement  is  denied  any  rela¬ 
tionship  with  such  conditioning  factors  as  the  body.  And  then 
by  saying,  “It  .attains  its  own  nature”  (VIII.  xii.  2),  Prajapati 
reveals  the  individual  being,  called  samprasada  (one  wholly 
serene  in  sleep)  in  its  identity  with  Brahman,  and  thereby  he 
does  not  show  the  individual  soul  to  be  anything  other  than 
the  supreme  Brahman  which  is  immortal  and  fearless  by  nature. 

Some,  however,  think  that  if  the  idea  sought  to  be  imparted 


I.  iii.  19] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


195 


be  that  of  the  supreme  Self,  then  it  is  improper  to  drag  in  the 
individual  soul  in  connection  with  the  text,  “I  shall  explain  this 
very  one  to  you  over  again”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  3);  so  they  consider 
the  meaning  of  that  sentence  to  be  this:  “I  shall  explain  to  you 
again,  this  very  one,  that  is  the  Self,  pointed  out  at  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  topic  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  and  that  is  possessed 
of  the  characteristic  of  freedom  from  sin  and  so  on”.  If  their 
interpretation  be  accepted,  the  Upani$adic  word  “this”,  which 
naturally  relates  to  something  proximate,  becomes  distantly 
related,  and  the  phrase  “over  again”  becomes  meaningless,  for 
what  is  stated  at  the  earlier  stage  is  no  longer  repeated  at  the 
later.  Again,  if  Prajapati  starts  wih  the  promise,  “I  shall  explain 
this  very  one  to  you”,  and  then  explains  a  fresh  entity  (viz  the 
soul  in  dream  and  sleep)  at  every  stage,  earlier  than  the  fourth, 
then  he  will  be  open  to  the  charge  of  prevarication.  Therefore 
(the  correct  interpretation  is  this):  After  the  unreal  aspect  of 
the  individual  being,  conjured  up  by  ignorance  etc.,  tainted  by 
many  such  defects  as  agentship,  experiencership,  love,  hatred, 
etc.,  and  subject  to  many  evils,  has  been  eliminated,  the  opposite 
aspect,  viz  the  reality  that  is  the  supreme  Lord,  possessed  of  the 
characteristics  of  freedom  from  sin  and  so  on,  becomes  revealed, 
just  as  the  rope  etc.  are  revealed  after  eliminating  the  snake  etc. 
(superimposed  on  them  through  error). 

There  are  other  doctrinaires,  as  also  some  of  our  Vedantins, 
who  think  that  the  creature  aspect  is  real.  This  Sariraka  text 
(i.e.  this  book,  discussing  the  embodied  soul)  is  begun  as  a 
protest  against  all  of  them  who  are  opposed  to  the  complete 
realization  of  the  oneness  of  the  Self.  The  theme  of  this 
Sariraka  text  is  this:  The  supreme  Lord  is  but  one — unchanging, 
eternal,  absolute  Consciousness;  but  like  the  magician  He  appears 
diversely  through  Maya,  otherwise  known  as  Avidya  (ignor¬ 
ance).19  Apart  from  this  there  is  no  other  Consciousness  as 
such. 

19  Ratnaprabha  makes  no  distinction  between  Maya  and  Avidya ,  though 
it  is  admitted  that  the  juxtaposition  of  the  two  terms  implies  a  difference 
between  the  two  powers  of  Maya — of  covering  and  disturbing — which 
fact  may  give  rise  to  different  terminology.  But  others  would  maintain 
that  Maya  refers  to  cosmic  nescience  and  Avidya  to  individual  ignorance. 


196 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.iii.  19 


As  for  the  assumption  of  the  individual  soul  in  a  text  relating 
to  the  supreme  Lord,  and  its  subsequent  repudiation  by  the 
aphorist  under  the  aphorism,  “Should  not  the  other  one  be  the 
small  Space,  since  that  is  alluded  to?  No,  for  that  is  impossible” 
(I.  iii.  18),  etc.,  his  intention  there  is  this.  When  he  affirms  the 
difference  between  the  supreme  Self  and  the  individual  soul  his 
idea  is  this:  “Just  as  some  surface  and  dirt  are  fancied  on  the 
sky,  so  the  idea  of  the  individual  soul,  opposed  though  it  is 
to  the  supreme  Self,  is  superimposed  on  the  supreme  Self  which 
is  by  nature  eternally  pure,  intelligent,  free,  everlasting,  un¬ 
changing,  one,  and  unattached;  I  shall  remove  that  superimposi¬ 
tion  later  on,  and  demolish  all  theories  of  duality  with  the  help 
of  texts  that  have  the  support  of  logic,  and  then  establish  the 
unity  of  the  Self”.  But  he  will  not  establish  the  difference  of 
the  individual  soul  from  the  supreme  Self,  though  he  simply 
restates  the  popular  notion  of  the  difference  of  the  individual 
that  is  fancied  through  ignorance;  and  he  will  show  that  when 
such  a  procedure  is  adopted,  the  injunctions  about  rites  and 
duties,  based  on  this  reiteration  of  instinctive  agentship  and 
experiencership,  do  not  become  contradicted.  But  under  the 
aphorism,  “But  the  instruction  follows  from  the  point  of  view 
of  the  vision  agreeing  with  the  scriptures,  as  in  the  case  of 
Vamadeva”  (I.  i.  30)  etc.,  he  shows  that  the  conclusion  to  be 
arrived  at  about  the  purport  of  the  scriptures  is  only  the  unity 
of  the  Self.  It  was  also  shown  by  us  how  the  conflict  with  the 
injunctions  about  the  rites  and  duties  is  to  be  resolved  by  a 
reference  to  the  distinction  between  the  enlightened  and  un¬ 
enlightened  men.20 

3 IRo|| 

Tf  And  3T?*T-3T«r:  for  a  different  purpose  qrTPTCf:  (is  the) 
reference. 

20.  Moreover ,  the  reference  (to  the  individual  soul  in  the 
complementary  passage)  is  meant  for  a  different  purpose. 

Opponent:  It  was  pointed  out  earlier  that  in  the  passage, 

20  Rites  etc.  are  meant  for  the  unenlightened,  still  groping  in  ignorance. 


I.  iii.  21]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA5YA  197 

“Now  then  that  which  is  this  samprasada  (wholly  serene  one)” 
etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  4),  occurring  in  the  complementary  passage 
of  the  topic  of  the  small  Space,  the  individual  soul  is  referred  to. 
That  reference  will  become  meaningless  if  the  small  Space  is 
explained  to  be  the  supreme  Lord,  for  then  there  will  be  no 
meditation  on  the  individual  soul,  nor  will  this  be  an  instruction 
about  some  distinct  attribute  of  the.  small  Space  under  discussion 
(which  is  different  from  the  individual). 

Vedantin :  Hence  follows  this  answer:  This  reference  to  the 
individual  soul  has  a  different  purport;  it  is  not  meant  merely 
to  determine  the  nature  of  the  individual. 

What  does  it  determine  then? 

It  determines  merely  the  nature  of  the  supreme  Lord. 

How? 

The  individual  being,  referred  to  by  the  term  samprasada , 
plays  the  role  of  the  supervising  director  of  this  cage,  made  up 
of  the  body  and  senses,  during  all  the  wakeful  dealings;  and 
then  moving  in  the  nerves,  it  experiences  the  dreams  created  by 
the  impressions  of  that  wakeful  state.  Then  becoming  tired  and 
desirous  of  having  some  refuge,  it  rises  above  (i.e.  gets  detached 
from)  its  identity  with  both  kinds  of  bodies  (gross  and  subtle), 
approaches  in  the  sleep  state  the  supreme  Light,  that  is  the 
supreme  Brahman  referred  to  by  the  term  Space,  and  getting 
rid  of  the  particularized  cognition  attains  its  true  nature.  The 
supreme  Light  which  it  has  to  approach  as  also  its  own  nature 
in  which  it  becomes  established,  is  the  Self  possessed  of  the 
attributes  of  freedom  from  sin  and  so  on;  and  this  Self  is  to  be 
meditated  on.  Thus  this  reference  to  the  individual  soul  for 
that  purpose  becomes  logical  even  for  those  who  stand  by  the 
supreme  Lord.21 


IR?ll 

Owing  to  the  mention  of  smallness  in  the  Upani$ad 
if  such  be  the  objection,  ^  that  has  been  already 
answered. 


21  Even  if  Prajapati  refers  to  the  individual  for  proving  its  Brahman- 
hood,  there  is  no  contradiction.  Since  the  individual  as  such  is  not  dealt 


198  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  21 

21.  If  it  be  argued  that  from  the  Upanifadic  mention  of  small¬ 
ness  y  (the  small  space  must  be  the  individual  being),  then  this 
has  been  repudiated  earlier . 

And  the  objection  was  raised  that  the  smallness  of  Space 
that  is  heard  of  in  the  passage,  “The  small  Space  that  is  within 
it”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  1),  cannot  properly  fit  in  with  the  supreme 
Lord,  whereas  it  quite  befits  the  individual  soul  that  is  compara¬ 
ble  to  the  tip  of  a  goading  stick  (Sv.  V.  8).  A  refutation  of 
that  is  called  for.  This  objection  was  disposed  of  under  the 
aphorism,  “If  it  be  objected  that  the  supreme  Self  is  not  taught 
here  because  of  the  smallness  of  the  abode  and  because  of  its 
being  referred  to  as  such  (by  the  Upani$ad),  then  we  say,  no; 
for  this  is  done  for  the  sake  of  contemplation  as  is  seen  in  the 
case  of  space”  (I.  ii.  7),  where  it  was  shown  that  a  limitation 
for  the  supreme  Lord  is  possible  from  a  relative  standpoint  (for 
the  sake  of  meditation).  The  aphorist  here  suggests  that  the 
refutation  made  there  is  to  be  applied  here  as  well. 

Moreover,  this  limitation  is  repudiated  by  the  Upani$ad  itself 
by  resorting  to  a  comparison  with  the  famliar  space  in  the 
passage,  “The  Space  within  this  heart  has  the  same  magnitude 
as  this  (material)  space”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  3). 

Topic  6:  Acting  in  Accordance 

rf  H^ll 

3pj«p^:  Because  of  the  fact  of  acting  in  accordance  q 
and  the  word  “His”. 

22.  Because  of  the  fact  of  acting  (i.e.  shining)  in  accordance , 
and  because  of  the  use  of  the  word  “ His ”,  (the  Light  mentioned 
in  the  Mundaka  Upani$ad  must  be  Brahman). 

Doubt :  The  Upanijad  reads  thus:  “There  the  sun  does  not 
shine,  nor  the  moon  or  the  stars;  nor  do  these  flashes  of  lightning 
shine  there.  How  can  this  fire  do  so?  Everything  shines  in 


with  by  Prajapati,  one  cannot  conclude  that  the  individual  forms  the 
subject-matter  of  discussion  here. 


199 


I.  iii. 22]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 

accordance  with  His  shining;  by  His  light  all  this  shines 
diversely”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  10;  Ka.  II.  ii.  15).  Now  the  doubt  arises 
with  regard  to  this  text  as  to  whether  the  entity  in  whose  wake 
all  these  shine  and  through  whose  light  all  this  shines  diversely, 
is  some  natural  lustrous  matter  or  the  conscious  Self. 

Opponent:  When  in  such  a  predicament,  the  conclusion  is 
that  it  is  some  lustrous  matter. 

Why? 

Because  what  is  denied  is  the  shining  of  lustrous  entities  like 
the  sun  etc.,  it  being  well  known  that  the  luminaries — moon, 
stars,  etc. — do  not  shine  in  the  daytime  when  the  bright  sun 
keeps  shining.  Similarly  it  can  be  understood  that  the  luminous 
substance  in  whose  presence  all  these  moon,  stars,  and  so  on 
cease  to  shine  together  with  the  sun,  must  be  by  nature  a 
luminary.  And  “shining  in  accordance  with  another”  also  fits 
in  with  the  assumption  of  a  natural  luminary;  for  action  in 
imitation  is  seen  in  the  case  of  things  of  the  same  nature,  as  for 
instance,  in  the  act  of  following  someone  going  ahead.  There¬ 
fore  it  must  be  some  natural  light. 

Vedantin :  Under  such  circumstances  we  say:  It  must  be  the 
conscious  (self-luminous)  Self. 

Why? 

Because  of  “acting  in  accordance”,  which  phrase  means 
imitation.  This  shining  in  imitation,  as  implied  in,  “He  shining, 
all  this  shines”,  fits  in  exactly  if  the  conscious  Self  is  accepted; 
for  the  conscious  Self  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad  as  “luminous 
by  nature  and  having  true  resolve”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2).  For  it  is 
not  a  matter  of  experience  that  the  sun  and  other  things  shine 
in  accordance  with  some  other  shining  substance.  The  luminaries 
like  the  sun  etc.  are  similar  in  nature,  so  that  they  do  not  have 
to  depend  on  some  other  luminary,  in  accordance  with  which 
they  have  to  shine.  For  a  lamp  does  not  shine  in  imitation  of 
another  lamp.  As  for  the  assertion  that  acting  in  imitation  is 
seen  in  the  case  of  things  of  the  same  nature,  there  is  no  such 
hard  and  fast  rule;  for  action  in  imitation  is  seen  in  the  case 
of  dissimilar  things  as  well.  For  instance,  a  red-hot  ball  of  iron 
simulates  fire  and  burns  things  in  accordance  with  the  fire’s  doing 
so.  Or  take  another  illustration:  The  particles  of  earth  blow 


200  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.22 

about  as  the  wind  does  so.  By  saying,  “Because  of  the  fact  of 
acting  in  accordance”,  the  aphorist  suggests  “shining  in  accord¬ 
ance  with”.  And  by  the  words  “and”  “His”,  the  aphorist  refers 
to  the  fourth  line  of  this  verse,  “by  His  light  all  this  shines 
diversely”,  where  also  it  is  stated  that  the  shining  of  the  sun 
etc.  is  caused  by  the  Lord,  and  thereby  he  points  to  the 
conscious  Self.  Besides,  they  (the  followers  of  the  Bfhada- 
raoyaka  Upanijad)  read  thus  of  the  conscious  Self:  “Upon  that 
immortal  Light  of  lights  the  gods  meditate  (as  longevity)”  (IV. 
iv.  16).  It  is  against  experience  and  a  contradiction  in  terms  to 
say  that  the  luminaries  like  the  sun  etc.  shine  variously  with  the 
help  of  another  light,  for  one  light  dims  out  the  other.  Or  it 
may  be  that  it  is  not  merely  the  diverse  shining  of  the  sun  etc., 
enumerated  in  the  text,  that  is  caused  by  Him. 

What  else  is  illuminated  by  Him? 

From  the  text  “all  this”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  10),  used  without  any 
reservation,  it  follows  that  the  manifestation,  noticed  in  the 
cases  of  all  these  names,  forms,  actions,  and  results,  is  caused 
by  the  existence  of  the  light  of  Brahman,  just  as  the  revelation 
of  all  kinds  of  colour  is  caused  by  the  existence  of  the  light  of 
the  sun  etc.  And  by  the  use  of  the  word  “there”  in  the  verse, 
“There  the  sun  does  not  shine”  etc.  (ibid.),  it  is  shown  that 
the  subject-matter  already  under  consideration  is  to  be  accepted. 
The  subject-matter  that  is  being  dealt  with  in  the  verses,  “On 
which  are  strung  heaven  and  the  earth  and  interspace”  (Mu.  II. 
ii.  5)  etc.  is  Brahman.  Subsequently  also,  it  is  said,  “In  the 
supremely  bright  sheath22  is  Brahman,  free  from  taints  and 
without  parts.  It  is  pure,23  and  It  is  the  Light  of  lights.  It  is 
that  which  the  knowers  of  Brahman  realize”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  9). 
To  show  how  Brahman  is  the  Light  of  lights  occurs  the  verse, 
“There  the  sun  does  not  shine”  etc.  (Mu.  II.  ii.  10). 

It  was  also  argued  by  the  opponent:  Just  as  it  can  be  held 
that  no  other  light  can  shine  in  the  presence  of  the  sun,  so  also 
the  denial  of  illumination  by  the  luminaries  like  the  sun  etc.  is 

“The  blissful  sheath  which  is  higher  and  brighter  than  the  other 
sheaths — bodily,  vital,  mental,  and  intellectual. 

“Taintless— free  from  adventitious  defects;  pure— free  from  natural 
defects. 


I.iii.23] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 


201 


possible  if  there  be  some  other  entity  which  is  itself  a  luminous 
principle.  As  to  that,  it  was  shown  by  us  even  earlier  that  He 
(the  Lord)  alone  and  nothing  else  can  be  that  luminous  prin¬ 
ciple.24  It  is  proper  to  deny  that  they  can  have  any  illumination 
even  in  respect  of  Brahman;  for  whatever  is  perceived  is  per¬ 
ceived  through  the  light  that  is  Brahman,  but  Brahman  is  not 
perceived  through  any  other  light,  It  being  by  nature  self- 
effulgent.25  On  a  contrary  supposition  alone,  the  sun  and  the 
rest  could  illumine  It.  Brahman  reveals  all  others,  but  Brahman 
is  not  revealed  by  them,  as  is  shown  in  the  Upani$adic  texts,  “It 
is  through  the  light  of  the  Self  that  one  sits,  (goes  out,  works, 
and  returns)”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  6),  “It  is  imperceptible,  for  It  is  never 
perceived”  (Bjr.  III.  ix.  26),  and  so  on. 

srfqf  ^  Moreover,  (it  is)  mentioned  in  the  Smjrti. 

25.  Moreover ,  (this  aspect)  is  mentioned  in  the  Smrti . 

Moreover,  in  the  Smjti  this  aspect  is  mentioned  as  belonging 
to  the  conscious  Self,  as  in  the  Gita,  “That  the  sun  illumines  not, 
nor  the  moon,  nor  fire;  that  is  my  supreme  abode,  going  whither 
they  return  not”  (XV.  6),  and  “The  light  which  residing  in 
the  sun  illumines  the  whole  world,  that  which  is  in  the  moon 
and  in  the  fire — know  that  light  to  be  mine”  (XV.  12). 


34  If  there  can  be  some  light  in  whose  presence  the  sun  etc.  can  be 
dimmed,  then  the  opponent  can  raise  the  question,  “Is  it  that  light  or  some 
other  light  that  is  mentioned  here?”  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  Upanisad 
mentions  only  Brahman,  so  that  the  question  of  any  other  light  cannot 
arise  at  all. 

25  The  opponent  is  misled  by  thinking  that  the  word  tatra  in  the  text 
— “ Na  tatra  suryo  bhdti — there  the  sun  shines  not” — means,  “If  He  be 
there”,  that  is  to  say,  “in  His  presence”;  and  so  he  argues,  “If  Brahman 
be  there  and  nothing  can  shine  in  Brahman,  then  the  sun  etc.  will  never 
shine,  for  Brahman  is  eternally  present”.  The  Vedantin  says,  “ Tatra  means, 
with  regard  to  that  as  an  object”.  So  the  idea  is,  “Brahman  is  not  an  object 
that  can  be  illumined”.  The  locative  case  in  tatra  is  not  sati-saptami ,  but 
visayasaptaml . 


202 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  7:  The  Measured  One 


[I.  iii.24 


^1^  sfe  IRVll 

From  the  very  term  srfi^r:  the  measured  One  (is 

Brahman). 

24.  From  the  term  itself  it  follows  that  the  measured  One  is 
the  supreme  Self. 

Doubt :  It  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad,  “The  Being  (Puru$a) 
of  the  size  of  a  thumb,  resides  (in  the  heart)  within  the  body” 
(Ka.  II.. i.  12),  as  also,  “The  Puru$a,  who  is  of  the  size  of  a 
thumb,  is  like  a  light  without  smoke.  He  is  the  ruler  of  the  past 
and  the  future.  He  exists  today  and  He  will  exist  tomorrow. 
This  is  That”  (Ka.  II.  i.  13).  The  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the 
Puru§a  of  the  dimensions  of  a  thumb,  that  is  mentioned  there, 
is  the  individual  soul  identified  with  the  intellect  or  the  supreme 
Self. 

Opponent :  Now  then,  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the 
teaching  about  the  dimensions  is  that  the  soul  identified  with 
the  intellect  is  spoken  of.  For  the  Upani$ad  cannot  present  the 
supreme  Self,  which  is  infinite  in  length  and  expanse,  as  having 
the  size  of  a  thumb.  But  from  some  point  of  view,  it  is  possible 
for  the  soul,  which  is  identified  with  the  intellect,  to  be  of  the 
size  of  a  thumb  since  it  has  its  limiting  adjuncts.  This  is  borne 
out  by  Smtti  also:  “After  that,  Death  dragged  out  forcibly 
from  the  body  of  Satyavan,  the  Puru$a,  of  the  size  of  a  thumb, 
which  was  tied  with  a  noose  and  was  completely  at  his  mercy” 
(Mbh.  III.  ccxcvii.  17).  The  supreme  Lord  cannot  certainly 
be  dragged  out  forcibly  by  Death.  Thereby  it  is  established  in 
that  text  that  the  transmigratory  soul  has  the  size  of  a  thumb. 
And  it  is  that  very  soul  that  is  spoken  of  here. 

Vedantm :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  The  supreme  Self 
alone  can  be  the  Puru$a  here  of  the  size  of  a  thumb. 

How  so? 

From  the  text  itself,  viz  “the  ruler  of  the  past  and  the  future”, 
inasmuch  as  none  other  than  the  supreme  Lord  can  be  the 
absolute  ruler  of  the  past  and  the  future.  And  “This  is  That” 


I.iii.25]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  203 

(Ka.  II.  i.  3)  refers  back  to  the  subject-matter  inquired  into 
(by  Naciketas).  It  means:  “The  Brahman  that  is  asked  about 
is  this  indeed.”  The  entity  enquired  about  in  the  text,  “Tell 
(me)  of  that  entity  which  you  see  as  different  from  virtue, 
different  from  vice,  different  from  cause  and  effect,  and  different 
from  the  past  and  future”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14),  is  Brahman.  “From 
the  term  itself”  (in  the  aphorism)  means  this:  From  the  term  ruler 
(iS&na)  used  in  the  Upani$ad,  it  is  gathered  that  the  supreme 
Lord  is  meant.  This  is  the  idea. 

How,  again,  is  the  all-pervasive  supreme  Self  taught  as  pos¬ 
sessed  of  size? 

With  regard  to  this  we  say: 

fSlfeFn  ^  H^ll 

^  But  aptenn  from  the  point  of  view  of  existence  within 
the  heart  (t^ie  scripture)  being  concerned 

with  human  beings. 

25.  But  the  size  is  spoken  of  from  the  point  of  view  of  exist¬ 
ence  within  the  heart ,  the  scripture  being  concerned  with  human 
beings. 

Just  as  the  space  within  a  section  of  a  bamboo  can  be  spoken 
of  as  being  a  cubit  in  length,  so  from  the  point  of  view  of 
existence  within  the  heart,  it  can  be  asserted  that  though  the 
supreme  Self  is  all-pervasive,  It  has  the  size  of  a  thumb.  For  the 
supreme  Self,  which  as  a  matter  of  course  transcends  all  limita¬ 
tions,  cannot  really  have  the  size  of  a  thumb.  And  it  was  pointed 
out  that  because  of  the  words  “ruler”  etc.,  none  other  than  the 
supreme  Self  can  be  acceptable  here. 

Opponent :  Since  the  hearts  have  no  definite  size  as  they 
differ  from  creature  to  creature,  the  possession  of  a  size  like 
that  of  a  thumb  is  not  possible  even  from  that  point  of  view. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  answer  is  being  given,  “The  scripture 
being  concerned  with  human  beings”.  Though  the  scripture 
speaks  impersonally,  still  it  postulates  the  competence  of  human 
beings  only,  because  human  beings  are  able,  desirous  (of 
results),  and  not  debarred,  and  because  there  are  texts  about 


204  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  25 

initiation  with  the  sacred  thread.  This  is  elaborated  under  the 
topic  of  the  characteristics  of  a  competent  person  (Jai.  Su  VI. 
i.  25-28).  Moreover,  the  human  body  has  a  definitely  propor¬ 
tionate  size;  and  human  hearts  have  ever  the  definite  size  of  the 
(respective)  thumbs.  Accordingly,  the  scripture  being  con¬ 
cerned  with  men,  it  is  but  logical  that  the  supreme  Self  should 
have  the  size  of  a  thumb  from  the  standpoint  of  Its  residence 
within  the  human  heart.  It  was  argued,  that  from  the  teaching 
of  the  size  and  on  the  authority  of  the  Smjti,  it  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  that  the  entity,  that  has  the  size  of  a  thumb,  is  the  trans¬ 
migrating  soul.  That  is  being  repudiated.  It  is  taught  here  that 
the  very  soul  that  transmigrates  and  has  the  size  of  a  thumb  is 
Brahman,  just  as  it  is  done  in  the  text,  “That  is  the  Self.  That 
thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7).  For  the  texts  of  the  Upani^ads 
assume  two  forms:  sometimes  they  determine  the  nature  of  the 
supreme  Self  and  sometimes  they  teach  the  identity  of  the  soul, 
conditioned  by  the  intellect,  with  the  supreme  Self.  That  being 
the  fact,  what  is  taught  here  is  the  identity  of  the  soul,  condi¬ 
tioned  by  the  intellect,  with  the  supreme  Self,  and  not  that 
anything  has  the  size  of  the  thumb.  This  fact  will  be  clarified 
later  on  (by  the  Upani$ad)  in  the  verse:  “Puru$a,  the  indwelling 
Self  of  the  size  of  a  thumb,  is  ever  seated  in  the  hearts  of  men. 
With  a  masterly  control  of  the  senses,  one  should  separate  Him 
from  one’s  body  like  stalk  from  the  Munja  grass.  Him  one 
should  know  as  self-effulgent  and  changeless”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  17). 

Topic  8:  Gods 

ll^ll 

arfa  (Beings)  higher  even  than  .these  (according 

to)  Badarayana  for  that  is  possible. 

26.  Badarayana  thinks  that  beings  higher  than  these  (men) 
(are  also  qualified  for  knowledge),  for  that  is  possible. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  Upani$adic  text  about  the  size  of  a 
thumb  stands  justified  in  relation  to  the  heart,  the  scriptures 
being  concerned  with  human  beings.  In  connection  with  that  it 


I.iii.26]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  205 

is  said:  It  is  true  that  the  scriptures  sanction  the  competence  of 
human  beings  (for  religious  deeds);  but  with  regard  to  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  there  is  no  hard  and  fast  rule  that  the 
sanction  in  this  field  (also)  is  for  the  human  beings  alone.  The 
teacher  Badarayaija  thinks  that  the  scriptures  sanction  the  com¬ 
petence  even  of  those  divine  beings  and  others  who  exist  above 
these  men. 

Why? 

Because  that  is  possible;  for  they  too  have  the  desire  etc. 
that  confer  the  competence.  Among  those  factors,  even  the  gods 
can  have  the  hankering  for  liberation,  caused  by  a  reflection  on 
the  impermanence  etc.  of  divine  glory,  included  as  it  is  within 
the  range  of  created  things.  Similarly  they  can  have  the  ability, 
since  it  can  be  gathered  from  the  Vedic  verses,  corroborative 
passages,  anecdotes,  mythology,  and  common  belief,  that  they 
have  bodies.  Moreover,  they  are  not  debarred  anywhere.  Nor 
can  it  be  said  that  they  are  barred  out  by  the  scriptures  about 
the  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread;  for  investiture  is  meant 
for  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  and  to  them  the  Vedas  get  revealed 
spontaneously  (owing  to  their  study  in  previous  births).  Besides, 
the  scriptures  speak  of  their  following  the  vow  of  brahmacharya 26 
for  the  mastery  of  knowledge  as  in,  “Indra  lived  with  Prajapati 
for  one  hundred  and  one  years  under  the  vow  of  brahmacarya” 
(Ch.  VIII.  xi.  3),  “Bhj-gu,  well-known  son  of  Varu^a,  went  to 
his  father  Varuoa  with  the  prayer,  ‘Teach  me  Brahman,  O 
venerable  sir’”  (Tai.  III.  i),  and  so  on.  Though  the  competence 
for  rites  is  denied  in,  “There  is  no  competence  for  the  gods, 
since  they  have  no  gods  (to  sacrifice  to)”,  “The  have  no 
competence  for  the  performance  of  rites,  since  they  have  no 
rsis  (to  perform  to)”  (Jai  Su.  VI.  i.  6-7),  still  that  non-compet¬ 
ence  does  not  apply  to  knowledge  (of  Brahman).  For  when 
Indra  and  others  are  admitted  to  be  qualified  for  knowledge, 
they  do  not  have  to  do  anything  to  another  set  of  Indra  and  the 
rest,  nor  have  Bhtgu  and  other  rsis  to  do  to  another  set  of 
Bhjgu  and  others  belonging  to  the  same  lineage.  So  who  can 

M  Living  with  a  teacher  for  the  study  of  the  Vedas  under  a  vow  of 
continence. 


206  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.26 

deny  the  competence  for  knowledge  even  for  the  gods  and 
others?  And  even  in  the  case  of  the  gods,  the  Upani$adic  text 
about  the  soul  of  the  size  of  a  thumb  is  not  improper  when  their 
own  thumbs  are  kept  in  view. 


faften  iR\9ii 

fafttT:  A  contradiction  sfnrfin  in  the  matter  of  rites, 
if  such  be  the  objection,  q-  not  so  since  in 

the  Vedas  are  seen  the  assumption  of  many  bodies. 

27.  If  it  be  objected  that  this  ( corporeality  of  the  gods)  will 
give  rise  to  a  contradiction  (in  the  matter  of  the  gods  being 
associated)  in  rites ,  then  we  reply :  Not  so,  for  in  the  Vedas  are 
noticed  the  assumption  of  many  bodies . 

Opponent :  It  may  come  to  this:  If  by  admitting  bodies  etc. 
for  the  gods,  it  is  argued  that  they  have  competence  for  knowl¬ 
edge,  then  just  because  they  are  possessed  of  bodies,  it  has  to 
be  admitted  that  like  the  priests  and  others,  Indra  and  others 
also  take  part  in  the  rites  by  their  physical  proximity.  In  that 
case  an  incompatibility  will  crop  up  in  the  matter  of  rites;  for 
Indra  and  others  are  not  seen  to  form  parts  of  the  rites  by  their 
physical  presence,  nor  is  that  possible,  for  Indra  cannot  be 
bodily  present  at  many  sacrifices  at  the  same  time. 

Vedantin :  That  incongruity  does  not  arise. 

’Why? 

Because  of  the  assumption  of  many  bodies — because  even  for 
a  single  god  there  is  the  possibility  of  assuming  many  bodies 
simultaneously. 

How  is  this  known? 

“Because  this  is  noticed  in  the  Vedas”.  Starting  with  the 
(question  of  Sakalya),  “How  many  gods  are  there?”  (Bj*.  III. 
ix.  1),  the  number  of  gods  is  determined  (by  Yajnavalkya)  to 
be  “three  hundred  and  three,  and  three  thousand  and  three”. 
And  when  the  question  is  put,  “Which  are  those?”,  the  Upa- 
iiisad  states,  (through  Yajnavalkya),  “These  are  but  the  mani¬ 
festations  of  them;  but  there  are  only  thirty-three  gods”  (Bj\ 
III.  ix.  2),  by  which  statement  the  Upani$ad  shows  that  each 


l.iii.27]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  207 

god  can  have  many  forms  simultaneously.  Similarly  the  thirty- 
three  are  shown  to  be  included  in  six;  and  so  it  goes  on  till 
to  the  question,  “Which  is  the  one  God?”  the  answer  is  given, 
“The  Vital  Force  (Hiraoyagarbha)”  (Bj\  III.  ix.  9).  By  show¬ 
ing  here  the  identity  of  all  the  gods  with  Hiraoyagarbha,  the 
Upani$ad  reveals  that  Hiraijyagarbha  Himself  has  multiple 
forms  simultaneously.  Similar  is  the  Smjrti  text,  “O  best  of  the 
line  of  Bharata,  the  Yogin,  after  attaining  the  mystic  power  (of 
Yoga),  should  create  many  bodies  for  himself,  and  should  move 
over  the  earth  through  them  all.  He  should  acquire  (desirable) 
objects  through  some  of  them,  and  through  some  he  should 
perform  hard  austerities.  And  again,  he  should  withdraw  them 
all  like  the  (setting)  sun  withdrawing  its  rays”.  This  and  other 
Sniftis  of  a  similar  purport  show  how  even  the  Yogins,  who 
succeed  in  acquiring  the  mystic  powers  of  becoming  subtle  etc. 
(at  will),  can  have  association  with  many  bodies  at  the  same 
time.  Therefore  it  goes  without  saying  that  the  gods,  dowered 
with  perfection  from  birth,  will  have  these  multiple  bodies.  And 
since  it  is  possible  to  assume  many  bodies,  each  god  can  divide 
himself  into  multifarious  bodies  to  be  associated  simultaneously 
with  many  sacrifices.  And  yet  they  cannot  be  seen  by  others 
because  of  their  power  of  remaining  invisible.  Thus  it  all  stands 
justified. 

Or  the  second  part  of  the  aphorism  may  be  explained  other¬ 
wise  (to  mean,  “because  various  ways  of  taking  part  in  a  sacri¬ 
fice  are  in  evidence”).  Even  for  embodied  beings  it  is  seen  that 
in  the  matter  of  injunction  for  becoming  associated  with  rites 
etc.,  there  are  various  ways  of  doing  so.  Sometimes  no  single 
embodied  being  is  associated  simultaneously  with  many  rites; 
for  instance,  when  feasts  are  offered  by  many,  no  single  Brah- 
maija  is  fed  simultaneously.  But  sometimes  even  a  single 
embodied  being  becomes  associated  with  many  acts,  as  when  a 
single  Brahmana  is  greeted  by  many  saluting  him  at  the  same 
time.  Similarly,  here  also,  since  sacrifices  consist  in  parting  with 
one’s  things  in  honour  of  somebody,  many  can  offer  their  res¬ 
pective  things  in  the  name  of  a  single  embodied  god.  Thus 
nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  the  gods,  so  far  as  rites  are  con¬ 
cerned,  even  though  they  have  bodies. 


208  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A$YA  [I.iii.28 

5F?  SPTcllcSIcq^H^HIWllH.  IR^II 

In  relation  to  the  Vedic  words  (the  contradiction  will 
arise)  if  such  be  the  objection,  ^  not  so,  3RT: 

since  from  that  it  arises  as  is  proved  by  direct 

revelation  and  inference. 

28.  If  it  be  objected  that  this  contradicts  the  validity  of  Vedic 
words,  the?i  not  so,  for  the  universe  arises  from  this,  which  fact 
is  proved  by  direct  revelation  and  inference. 

Opponent :  Granted  even  that  even  if  bodies  are  assumed  for 
gods,  no  contradiction  will  arise  in  the  matter  of  their  associa¬ 
tion  with  rites,  still  a  contradiction  will  arise  as  regards  the 
authority  of  the  Vedic  words. 

How? 

It  is  on  the  basis  of  the  inborn  relationship  between  words 
and  their  meanings  from  the  very  beginning  that  the  validity 
of  the  Vedas  has  been  established  by  saying,  “Because  of  inde¬ 
pendence  of  other  means  of  proof”  (Jai  Su.  I.  i.  5).  According 
to  the  present  view,  however,  although  a  god,  assumed  to  have 
a  body,  can  enjoy  the  oblation  at  many  sacrifices  by  virtue  of 
his  possession  of  mystic  power,  still  owing  to  embodiedness,  he 
will  be  subject  to  birth  and  death  just  like  ourselves.  And  this 
will  militate  against  the  validity  of  the  Vedic  words,  which  is 
based  on  the  perception  of  an  eternal  relation  between  eternally 
present  words  with  their  eternal  meanings. 

Vedantin:  This  contradiction,  too,  does  not  exist. 

Why? 

“Since  from  this  it  arises” — because  the  universe,  consisting  of 
the  gods  and  others,  originates  verily  from  the  Vedic  words. 

Opponent :  Under  the  aphorism,  “That  from  which  this  uni¬ 
verse  has  its  birth  etc.”  (I.  i.  2),  has  it  not  been  ascertained  that 
the  universe  originates  from  Brahman?  How  can  it  be  said  here 
that  it  originated  from  words?  Moreover,  even  if  it  be  conceded 
that  it  arose  from  the  Vedic  words,  how  can  this  obviate  the 
contradiction  as  regards  the  (eternality  of)  words,  since  such 
objects  denoted  by  words  as  the  Vasus,  Rudras,  Adityas, 
ViSvedevas,  Maruts,  will  be  non-eternal,  just  because  those 


209 


I.  iii.  28]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 

objects  had  an  origin?  And  if  the  gods  be  impermanent,  who 
can  avoid  the  non-eternality  of  Vedic  words  “Vasus”  etc. 
which  signify  those  gods?  For  it  is  a  well-known  fact  in  the 
world  that  it  is  only  after  a  son  is  born  to  Devadatta  that  the 
boy  is  given  some  such  name  as  Yajnadatta.  Accordingly,  this 
(embodiedness  of  the  gods)  is  a  real  obstacle  against  the  (vali¬ 
dity  of)  words. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  the  relationship  between  such  generic 
words  and  their  meanings,  as  for  instance  cowhood  and  cows, 
is  seen  to  be  eternal  (i.e.  beginningless).  Not  that  the  distin¬ 
guishing  characteristics  (i.e.  genus)  of  the  cows  etc.  are  created 
afresh  each  time  these  cows  etc.  are  bom;  for  the  individual 
forms  of  substances,  qualities,  and  actions  alone  can  have  origin, 
but  not  so  their  distinguishing  (general)  characteristics  (i.e. 
genus).  And  words  are  connected  with  the  general  characteris¬ 
tics  and  not  with  the  individuals;  for  the  individuals  are  infinite, 
and  it  is  impossible  .  to  comprehend  the  relation  of  a  word 
(with  all  of  them).  Thus,  even  though  the  individuals  are  born, 
the  distinctive  general  characteristics  (or  features)  remain  con¬ 
stant,  so  that  this  creates  no  difficulty  about  the  etemality  of  the 
words  cow  etc.  Similarly  it  is  to  be  understood  that  even  though 
the  birth  and  death  of  individual  gods  be  admitted,  still  their 
distinctive  general  characteristics  (or  features)  have  no  begin¬ 
ning.  Accordingly,  this  does  not  militate  in  any  way  against 
(the  eternality  of)  the  words  Vasus  and  so  on.  As  for  the  dis¬ 
tinctive  general  characteristics  of  a  particular  deity,  they  are  to 
be  gathered  from  what  is  known  from  the  embodiedness  etc. 
mentioned  in  the  mantra  and  corroborative  portions  of  the 
Vedas.  And  like  the  words  commander  etc.  the  words  Indra 
etc.  are  used  in  relation  to  certain  ranks  etc.  Accordingly,  those 
who  occupy  the  respective  positions  are  called  by  the  various 
names — Indra  and  so  on.  Thus  there  is  nothing  contradictory. 
And  this  origination  from  words  is  not  spoken  of  in  the  sense 
of  birth  from  a  material  cause,  as  it  is  done  in  the  case  of  ori¬ 
gination  from  Brahman. 

In  what  sense  then? 

When  there  is  first  a  word  without  a  beginning  and  bearing 
a  meaning  with  which  it  has  an  eternal  connection,  then  only 
14 


210 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.iii.28 


is  there  a  possibility  of  an  individual  cropping  up  which  can  be 
fit  to  be  referred  to  by  that  word.  In  that  sense  it  is  said  to 
originate  from  a  word. 

How,  again,  is  it  known  that  the  universe  originates  from 
words? 

“From  direct  revelation  and  inference.”  By  “direct  revela¬ 
tion”  is  meant  the  Vedas,  since  they  do  not  depend  on  any  other 
means  of  knowledge  for  their  validity.  By  “inference”  is  meant 
the  Smrti,  for  it  depends  on  other  sources  for  its  validity.  Both 
of  them  show  that  creation  was  preceded  by  words,  as  is 
declared  in  the  Veda:  “Brahma  created  the  gods  by  (thinking 
of)  the  word  ete ;  He  created  men  and  others  by  the  word 
asfgram;  by  the  word  indavah  the  manes;  by  the  word  tirahpa- 
vitram  the  planets;  by  the  word  asavah  the  hymns;  by  the  word 
visvani  the  sastras;  and  by  the  word  abhisaubhagdh  the  other 
beings”27  (R.  V.  IX.  62).  Similarly  elsewhere  in  “He  (Prajapati) 
brought  about  the  union  of  speech  (the  Vedas)  with  the 
mind”28  (Bj%  I.  ii.  4),  and  other  places  where  the  Vedas  speak 
of  creation  as  preceded  by  words.  The  Smjti  also  speaks  simi¬ 
larly:  “In  the  beginning  was  projected  by  Prajapati,  the  eternal 
speech  in  the  form  of  the  Vedas  which  have  no  beginning  and 
end,  which  are  divine  (i.e.  run  through  the  traditional  line 
alone),  and  from  which  proceed  all  activities.”  And  even  this 
projection  of  speech  is  to  be  understood  in  the  sense  of  starting 
of  a  cycle  of  transmission  through  a  line  of  teachers  and  students; 
for  no  other  kind  of  projection  is  possible  for  the  Vedas  which 
are  without  any  beginning  and  end.  Similar  is  the  text:  “In  the 
beginning,  He,  the  great  Lord,  created  from  the  words  of  the 
Vedas  alone,  the  names  and  forms  of  the  creatures  and  promoted 

3,7  As  Prajapati  recollects  the  words  in  the  beginning  of  creation, 
the  meanings  of  the  words  call  up  to  His  mind  the  things  thus:  ete 
— these,  a  pronoun,  indirectly  reminds  Him  of  the  gods;  asrk  means  blood, 
so  asrgram  stands  for  men,  since  they  delight  in  the  body  in  which  blood 
predominates;  indu — moon,  points  to  the  manes  living  in  the  lunar  world; 
pavitra — Soma,  tirahpavitra — the  grahas  (planets)  that  hide  this  Soma 
within  themselves;  Rk  hymns  set  to  music  are  asavah;  the  sastras  used 
after  the  hymns  are  visva;  those  who  are  blessed  everywhere  are  recol¬ 
lected  through  saubhaga. 

28  He  reflected  on  creation  as  revealed  in  the  Vedas. 


Liu.  28]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  - BHA§YA  211 

religious  activities”  (Manu.  I.  21);  “In  the  beginning,  He  created 
from  the  Vedic  words  themselves,  the  names  of  all  beings,  and 
all  actions  separately,  as  also  the  separate  modes  of  life”.  Besides, 
it  is  a  matter  of  experience  to  us  all  that  when  one  has  to  accom¬ 
plish  some  desired  thing,  one  remembers  first  the  word  denoting 
it  and  then  accomplishes  it.  Similarly  it  is  understood  that  in  the 
case  of  Prajapati  also,  when  He  was  intent  on  creation,  the  Vedic 
words  flashed  in  His  mind  before  creation  and  then  He  created 
the  things  according  to  these.  In  confirmation  of  this  occur  the 
Vedic  texts,  such  as,  “He  uttered  the  syllable  bhuh ,  He  created 
the  earth”  (Tai.  Br.  II.  ii.  4.2),  which  show  the  creation  of  the 
worlds — the  earth  and  the  rest — from  the  words  bhuh  and  so 
on,  coming  to  His  mind. 

What  particular  nature  of  the  words  is  meant  when  it  is 
asserted  that  creation  comes  out  of  the  words? 

They  (the  grammarians)  say,  it  is  the  sphofa ,29  If  it  be  held 
that  creation  proceeds  from  the  letters  (constituting  the  words), 
then  since  the  letters  have  a  beginning  and  an  end,  the  view 
that  the  gods  spring  from  the  eternal  words  will  have  no  legs 
to  stand  on.  And  the  letters  have  a  beginning  and  an  end,  since 
at  every  fresh  utterance  they  appear  differently.  That  is  why 
even  when  a  person  is  not  in  sight,  it  can  be  clearly  determined 
from  the  sound  of  the  reading  itself,  e.g.  “This  is  Devadatta’s 
reading”  or  “This  is  Yajnadatta’s  reading”.  This  apprehension  of 
the  difference  in  respect  of  the  letters  is  not  false  inasmuch  as 
no  other  apprehension  emerges  to  contradict  this.  Nor  is  it 
reasonable  to  hold  that  the  meaning  is  gathered  from  the  letters; 
for  the  letters  cannot  convey  the  meaning  individually,  since 
this  is  not  universally  true.80  Nor  can  there  be  a  comprehension 
of  a  totality  of  letters,  for  the  letters  occur  in  sequence.81  It 
may  be  argued  that  the  last  letter,  in  association  with  the 


29  The  impression  created  in  the  mind  on  hearing  a  sound  (e.g.  cow) 
expressive  of  meaning  and  itself  expressed  by  the  letters  constituting  the 
sound  (e.g.  cow). 

80  For  it  is  not  a  fact  that  the  utterance  of  a  single  letter  conveys  the 
meaning;  and  if  a  single  letter  suffices,  the  others  will  be  useless. 

"Each  letter,  as  it  is  uttered,  lasts  for  one  moment,  and  hence  the 
letters  cannot  form  a  totality. 


212  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iii.  28 

impressions  of  the  letters  uttered  earlier  in  succession,  will 
convey  the  meaning.  But  that  cannot  be,  for  just  as  it  is  seen 
in  the  case  of  smoke  (that  it  can  make  the  fire  known  when  it 
is  itself  known),  so  a  word  can  convey  its  meaning  only  when 
it  is  itself  known  in  association  with  the  impressions  (as  having 
a  connection  with  its  meaning  like  smoke  with  fire).  But  it  is 
not  possible  to  apprehend  the  successive  letters  in  association 
with  the  impressions  of  earlier  letters,  since  impressions  are  not 
perceived  directly  (by  sense-organs).  If  it  be  argued  that  the 
last  letter,  in  association  with  the  impressions  made  known 
through  the  effect  (viz  the  comprehension  of  meaning  or 
memory)  resulting  from  the  impressions,  will  convey  the  mean¬ 
ing,  that  also  cannot  be.32  For  even  memory,  produced  by  the 
impressions,  proceeds  in  a  sequence.33  Accordingly,  a  word  is  of 
the  nature  of  a  sphota .  The  apprehension  of  the  letters  indi¬ 
vidually  sows  the  seed  in  the  mind  in  the  form  of  impression, 
which  attains  full  maturity  on  the  apprehension  of  the  last 
letter,  and  then  becoming  the  object  of  a  single  apprehension, 
it  flashes  in  the  mind  without  further  effort.34  This  singleness  of 
apprehension,  again,  is  not  a  form  of  memory  (of  a  collection 
of  letters),  for  the  letters  being  many,  they  cannot  form  the 
content  of  a  single  perception.  And  this  sphota  has  no  beginning, 
since  its  identity  is  recognizable  at  every  utterance  (of  the 
word).  The  idea  of  difference  springs  from  the  difference  of 
the  letters.  Therefore  the  universe  of  actions,  agents,  and  results. 


“This  will  be  arguing  in  a  circle,  the  impressions  being  known  from 
the  comprehension  of  meaning  and  the  comprehension  of  meaning  being 
dependent  on  the  apprehension  of  impressions.  The  memory  of  the 
meaning  of  a  word  can  occur  after  the  knowledge  of  the  word.  So  the 
knowledge  of  a  word,  defined  as  the  knowledge  of  the  last  letter  in 
association  with  the  impressions  of  earlier  letters,  cannot  produce  the 
knowledge  of  the  word. 

88  The  impressions,  inferred  from  the  recollections  occurring  in 
sequence,  will  have  a  sequence,  and  will  thus  fail  to  form  a  single 
entity. 

“Just  as  the  secret  of  gems  flashes  in  a  mind  trained  through  repeated 
observations.  The  sphota  emerges  in  the  form  of  the  apprehension,  “This 
is  a  single  word”,  without  further  cogitation  in  a  mind  that  has  been 
prepared  thus. 


I.iii.28]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  213 

standing  for  the  meaning  of  word,  emerges  from  the  eternal 
word,  conceived  of  as  a  sphofa ,  which  indicates  it. 

Vedantin :  But  the  venerable  Upavar§a  is  of  opinion  that  the 
letters  themselves  constitute  the  words.  As  for  the  objection 
raised  earlier  that  the  letters  have  a  beginning  and  an  end,  the 
reply  is  that  it  is  not  so,  for  they  are  recognized  as  “Those  are 
the  same  as  these”.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  recognition  is  caused 
by  similarity,  as  in  the  case  of  hair  etc.,  the  answer  is  that  it 
cannot  be  so,  since  the  recognition  cannot  be  repudiated  by  any 
other1  means  of  knowledge.  If  it  be  said  that  the  recognition 
arises  from  (the  unity  of)  species,  the  answer  is ‘that  it  cannot 
be  so,  since  the  individual  letters  are  recognized  to  be  the  same. 
The  recognition  would  have  been  caused  by  the  species  if  the 
letters  were  cognized  as  separate  entities  like  the  individual  cows 
at  the  time  of  each  fresh  utterance.  But  this  is  not  so,  for  it  is 
the  letters  themselves  that  are  cognized  to  be  the  same  at  each 
fresh  utterance,  the  recognition  taking  the  form,  “The  word 
cow  is  uttered  twice”,  but  not,  “There  are  two  words  ‘cow’ 

It  may  be  argued  that  it  was  pointed  out  earlier  that  owing  to 
differences  in  pronunciation,  letters  also  appear  differently,  as  is 
obvious  from  a  distinction  that  can  be  made  between  the  read¬ 
ings  of  Devadatta  and  Yajnadatta  from  a  mere  hearing  of  the 
sound  of  reading.  The  answer  will  be  this:  Granted  that  there 
is  a  definite  recognition  of  the  identity  (of  the  letters),  the 
peculiarity  about  the  (distinction  of)  letters  that  is  perceived 
can  be  explained  as  arising  not  from  their  intrinsic  difference 
(at  every  fresh  utterance),  but  from  the  difference  in  the  instru¬ 
ments  of  their  expression.  For  letters  are  expressed  by  the  asso¬ 
ciation  and  dissociation  of  air,  proceeding  upward  and  striking 
against  such  parts  of  the  mouth  as  the  palate  etc.  Besides,  to 
make  recognition  possible,  species  for  the  (individual)  letters 
will  have  to  be  posited  even  by  one  who  holds  the  view  that 
individual  letters  differ  (at  different)  utterances.  With  regard 
to  these  species,  again,  one  will  have  to  admit  differences  created 
by  conditioning  factors.  That  being  so,  it  is  better  to  say35  in 

“Better  than  to  say  that  (1)  each  letter  is  infinite  in  number,  (2)  on 
those  infinite  letters  the  species  inheres  individually,  (3)  in  them  adven¬ 
titious  differences  are  created  by  pitches — high,  low,  medium,  etc. 


214  BRAHMA  -  StfTRA  -  BHASYA  [I.  iii.  28 

conformity  with  the  law  of  parsimony  (or  brevity  of  imagina¬ 
tion)  that  the  ideas  of  difference  arise  with  regard  to  the  individ¬ 
ual  utterances  of  the  letters  owing  to  the  presence  of  condi¬ 
tioning  factors,  and  the  recognition  (of  identity)  arises  from 
their  intrinsic  nature.  This  very  fact  of  the  recognition  of 
identity  is  a  bar  against  any  idea  of  difference  in  relation  to  each 
utterance  of  any  letter.  When  a  letter,  for  instance  “g”,  is  the 
same,  how  can  it  possibly  become  divergent  at  that  very  same 
time  to  different  people  uttering  it  simultaneously  as  high- 
pitched,  low-pitched,  medium-pitched,  or  nasal,  non-nasal,  and 
so  on? 

Or  the  true  position  is  this:  This  cognition  of  difference  is 
created  by  the  sound  and  not  the  letter  itself;  and  hence  there 
is  no  fault. 

Opponent :  What  is  this  sound? 

Veddntin :  This  sound  is  that  which  reaches  the  ear  of  a 
distant  hearer  without  apprising  him  of  any  distinction  of  letters, 
but  invests  the  letters  with  such  differences  as  high  or  low 
pitch  etc.  in  his  ears  as  he  approaches  nearer.  The  difference 
in  loudness  etc.  is  a  creation  of  this  sound  and  not  of  the  let¬ 
ters  as  such;  for  the  identity  of  each  letter  is  recognized  at  every 
fresh  utterance.36  From  this  point  of  view,  the  highness  etc.  of 
pitch  gets  a  basis;  otherwise,  from  the  fact  that  each  letter,  when 
uttered,  seems  to  be  different,  though  it  is  recognized  as  the 
same,  one  would  have  to  fancy  that  the  difference  is  created  by 
the  air  coming  in  contact  with  or  getting  disconnected  from  the 
vocal  apparatus.  But  since  these  conjunction  and  disjunction 
are  not  perceived  by  the  ear,  the  distinction  created  by  them 
will  fail  to  be  associated  with  the  letters,  and  hence  this  cogni¬ 
tion  of  pitches — high,  low,  etc. — will  be  baseless.  Moreover,  the 
view  does  not  deserve  consideration  that  though  the  letters  are 
recognized  to  be  the  same,  still  they  differ  in  accordance  with 
the  differences  in  pitch;  for  anything  continuing  to  be  the 
same  does  not  differ  simply  because  of  the  difference  in  some¬ 
thing  else,  for  instance  a  species  is  not  considered  to  be  different 

“But  the  sound  of  the  letters  differs.  Accordingly,  letters  and  sound  are 
different.  Thus  nobody  thinks  of  the  unuttered  letters  as  intonated  or  of 
the  music  in  a  vina  as  letters. 


I.iii.28]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  215 

owing  to  the  difference  in  the  individuals  (of  the  species). 
Besides,  inasmuch  as  the  comprehension  of  meaning  can  follow 
from  the  letters,  it  is  useless  to  assume  a  sphofa. 

Opponent :  I  do  not  assume,  but  I  directly  perceive  the  sphofa, 
for  it  flashes  suddenly  in  the  intellect  imbued  with  the  impres¬ 
sions  of  letters  occurring  successively. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  that  comprehension  also  relates  to  letters. 
The  single  concept  “cow”,  arising  after  the  comprehension  of 
letters  individually,  emerges  on  the  basis  of  the  letters  as  a  whole 
and  not  any  other  thing  (called  sphota). 

How  can  this  be  known? 

Even  in  this  comprehension,  the  letters  “c”  etc.  (of  cow)  are 
in  evidence,  but  not  the  letters  “d”  etc.  For  if  a  sphofa,  which  is 
different  from  the  letters  “c”  etc.,  had  formed  the  content  of 
that  comprehension,  then  the  sphofa  would  have  ruled  out  “c” 
etc.  just  as  it  does  “d”  etc.  But  facts  are  otherwise.  Accordingly, 
this  idea  of  identity  is  based  on  the  memory  of  letters  alone. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  the  letters  being  many,  they 
cannot  form  the  basis  of  a  single  concept? 

Vedantin  :  To  that  we  say:  Even  many  things  can  be  the 
basis  of  a  single  concept  as  is  seen  in  the  cases  of  a  line,  a  forest, 
an  army,  ten,  hundred,  thousand,  etc.  As  for  the  idea  that  “cow” 
is  a  single  word,  that  is  only  a  secondary  idea  of  unity  applied 
to  the  letters  “c  o  w”  because  of  their  being  related  to  the  same 
object  “cow”,  as  is  the  case  with  the  ideas  of  forest,  army,  etc. 

Here  the  opponent  says:  If  the  letters  alone,  as  a  group,  form 
the  basis  of  a  single  concept  and  become  a  word,  then  in  such 
instances  as  jara  (paramour) — raja  (king),  kapi  (monkey) — 
pika  (cuckoo),  the  words  should  not  be  comprehended  dis¬ 
tinctly,  since  the  very  same  letters  appear  in  different  places  in  a 
different  order. 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  say:  Although  all  the  letters  in  a  word 
are  cognized,  still  like  the  ants  entering  into  the  idea  of  a  line  in 
a  definite  order,  the  letters  enter  into  the  notion  of  a  word  in 
their  definite  sequence.  That  being  the  case,  there  is  nothing 
illogical  in  understanding  a  particular  word  arising  from  a 
particular  arrangement,  even  though  the  letters  may  be  the 
same.  At  the  time  of  apprehending  the  meaning  of  words  from 


216  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.28 

the  use  of  them  by  older  people,  these  letters,  as  uttered  in  a 
certain  sequence,  were  understood  (by  a  child)  to  be  related  to 
certain  meanings;  so  at  the  time  of  his  own  dealings  with 
them  (by  the  child),  the  letters  apprehended  individually,  appear 
in  that  very  sequence  in  the  intellect  which  groups  them 
together,  and  thus  they  invariably  convey  those  particular 
senses.  In  this  way,  those  who  hold  by  the  letters  have  the  law 
of  parsimony  in  their  favour,  whereas  those  holding  the  theory 
of  sphofa  have  to  face  the  difficulties  of  rejecting  an  obvious 
thing  and  accepting  something  fanciful.37  Besides  that  theory 
assumes  too  many  things,  inasmuch  as  these  letters,  apprehended 
in  succession,  reveal  a  sphofa,  and  then  that  sphofa  reveals  the 
meaning.  Or  even  if  it  be  the  case  that  the  letters  are  quite  new 
at  every  fresh  utterance,  still  to  explain  the  recognition  of 
identity,  species  of  letters  has  to  be  admitted  perforce.  And  thus 
the  process  of  expression  of  meaning,  that  has  been  shown  in 
the  case  of  letters,  has  to  be  transferred  to  the  species  (by  them). 

Thus  (since  the  letters  are  permanent  and  convey  meanings, 
therefore)  it  involves  no  contradiction  to  say  that  the  gods  as 
individuals  emerge  from  the  eternal  words. 

3Rf  ^  ^  IRS.II 

^  And  3RT  from  this  very  fact  (follows)  eternality. 

29.  And  from  this  very  fact  follows  the  eternality  (of  the 
Vedas). 

The  beginninglessness  of  the  Vedas  stands  established  (in  the 
Purva-Mimamsa)  from  the  fact  that  no  independent  author  of 
the  Vedas  is  remembered  (i.e.  known).  That  having  been  taken 
for  granted,  the  admission  of  the  origin  of  individual  deities 
from  the  Vedic  words,  raised  a  doubt  about  the  non-etemality  of 
the  words  themselves.  This  was  refuted  by  saying,  “For  the 
universe  arises  from  this”  (I.  iii.  28).  Now  this  fact  of  eternality 
of  the  Vedas,  that  stands  unaffected,  is  being  confirmed  by 

87  The  obvious  fact  that  letters  express  an  idea,  and  the  fanciful  fact 
that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  sphota. 


I.iii.  30]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  217 

saying,  “And  from  this  very  fact  follows  eternality.”  “From 
this  very  fact” — from  the  fact  that  the  universe  of  gods  and 
others,  having  a  definite  form,  emerges  from  the  Vedic  words — 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  Vedic  words  also  are  eternal.  So 
also  the  mantra  text,  “The  sacrifices,  having  acquired  the  fitness 
to  receive  the  Veda  as  a  result  of  the  earlier  performance  of 
good  deeds,  received  it  as  it  had  already  existed  among  the 
(R.  V.  X.  lxxi.  3),  shows  the  acquisition  of  the  Veda  that 
had  already  existed.  Veda-Vyasa  also  writes  in  his  Snifti  thus: 
“In  days  of  yore,  the  great  rfis  received  through  austerities,  with 
the  permission  of  the  self-bom  One,  the  Veda,  together  with 
the  anecdotes,  that  had  remained  withdrawn  during  dissolution”. 

IftfMWI ft ll^o|| 

xT  And  ^ owing  to  the  similarity  of  names  and 

forms  arfr  even  in  the  revolution  of  world  cycles,  arfarta: 

there  is  no  contradiction  as  is  known  from  the  Vedas 

and  from  the  Sm^ti. 

30.  And  there  is  no  contradiction ,  since  similar  names  and 
forms  are  repeated  even  in  the  revolution  of  the  world  cyclesy 
as  is  known  from  the  Vedas  and  the  Smrti. 

Opponent :  Now  it  may  be  granted  that,  if  the  individual  gods 
originate  continuously  like  individual  animals  and  others,  and 
they  disappear  in  the  same  way,  then  there  will  be  no  dis¬ 
continuity  in  the  continuance  of  behaviour  based  on  words, 
meanings  of  words,  and  pronouncers  of  words;  and  thus  owing 
to  a  continuity  of  relationship,  the  defect  of  Vedic  words 
becoming  non-eternal  can  be  avoided.  But  how  can  this  diffi¬ 
culty  be  avoided  in  the  face  of  the  statements  in  the  Vedas  and 
the  Smrtis  that  the  whole  creation,  consisting  of  the  three 
worlds,  loses  its  names  and  forms  and  gets  dissolved  without  a 
trace,  and  it  emerges  again  as  a  fresh  entity? 

Vedantin  :  As  to  that  this  is  the  answer:  (There  is  no  con¬ 
tradiction  with  the  beginninglessness  of  the  Vedas),  because  of 
the  similarity  of  names  and  forms.  (If  final  dissolution  and  crea¬ 
tion  thereafter  be  believed  in)  even  then  the  beginninglessness 


218  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.30 

of  creation  has  to  be  admitted.  The  teacher  (Vyasa)  will 
establish  this  beginninglessness  in  the  aphorism,  “Moreover,  this 
is  logical  and  so  it  is  met  with”  (II.  i.  36).  Just  as  it  is  the  case 
that  although  we  hear  of  merging  and  emerging  in  sleep  and 
waking,  still  it  involves  no  contradiction,  because  the  behaviour 
in  the  succeeding  waking  state  follows  the  pattern  in  the  earlier 
one  in  the  case  of  the  beginningless  worldly  state,  so  also  it  is 
to  be  understood  that  the  creation  and  dissolution  in  a  subse¬ 
quent  cycle  raise  no  difficulty.  And  merger  and  emergence  of 
consciousness  in  sleep  and  waking  states  are  heard  of  in  the 
Upani$adic  texts,  “When  a  sleeping  man  sees  no  dream,  then  he 
becomes  unified  in  this  Prana  (i.e.  Self)  Itself.  Then  the  organ 
of  speech,  together  with  all  the  names,  merges  in  Prana\  the 
organ  of  sight,  with  all  the  forms,  gets  unified  in  Prana;  the 
organ  of  hearing,  with  all  the  sounds,  gets  united  in  Praaia;  the 
mind,  with  all  the  thoughts,  merges  in  Prana .  And  when  the 
soul  wakes  up,  then  just  as  sparks  dart  to  all  the  quarters  from 
a  blazing  fire,  similarly  from  the  Self  all  the  organs  proceed  to 
their  various  seats;  from  the  organs  emerge  the  gods,  and  from 
the  gods  the  sense-objects”  (Kau.  III.  3). 

Opponent :  It  may  be  conceded  that  in  sleep  there  is  no 
contradiction,  since  the  empirical  behaviour  of  other  individ¬ 
uals  continues  unbroken  and  since  the  man  who  wakes  up 
from  sleep  can  recollect  his  behaviour  in  the  past.  But  since 
all  behaviour  is  eradicated  in  final  dissolution,  and  since  the 
behavour  in  a  previous  cycle  of  creation  cannot  be  called  up 
to  memory  like  the  behaviour  in  a  past  life,  the  analogy  is 
inapt. 

Vedantin :  That  defect  does  not  arise;  for  although  the  final 
dissolution  intervenes  to  obliterate  all  empirical  behaviour,  still 
by  the  grace  of  God,  it  is  reasonably  possible  for  divine  beings 
like  Hiraoyagarbha  to  recollect  the  behaviour  in  an  earlier  cycle. 
From  the  fact  that  ordinary  creatures  are  not  seen  to  recollect 
their  past  lives,  it  does  not  follow  that  the  fact  must  be  the 
same  in  the  case  of  divine  beings  as  well.  It  is  noticed  that 
although  as  living  creatures  all  are  the  same,  counting  from 
men  to  a  clump  of  grass,  still  the  obstruction  to  the  manifesta¬ 
tion  of  knowledge,  glory,  etc.  increases  successively  all  through 


I.  iii.  30]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  219 

the  series  at  each  stage;  similarly  when  it  is  mentioned  more 
than  once  in  the  Vedas  and  Smrtis  that  knowledge,  glory,  etc. 
become  increasingly  more  manifest  at  each  successive  stage 
counting  from  men  themselves  up  to  Hiranyagarbha,  it  cannot 
be  brushed  aside  as  non-existent.  From  this  it  logically  follows, 
on  the  analogy  of  a  man  risen  up  from  sleep,  that  the  recollec¬ 
tion  of  the  behaviour  in  a  past  cycle  is  possible  for  beings  like 
Hiraoyagarbha,  who  had  undertaken  meditation  and  work  in  a 
superexcellcnt  way  in  a  past  cycle,  who  have  emerged  at  the 
beginning  of  the  present  cycle  (as  a  result  of  past  achievement), 
and  who  have  been  vouchsafed  the  grace  of  God.  In  support 
of  this  here  is  a  Vedic  text:  “Hankering  after  liberation,  I  take 
refuge  in  that  self-effulgent  Being,  revealing  Himself  in  my 
intellect  that  is  transformed  in  the  likeness  of  that  Being  Him¬ 
self,  who  created  Hiraijyagarbha  in  the  beginning  and  trans¬ 
mitted  the  Vedas  to  Him”  (Sv.  VI.  18).  And  Saunaka  and  others 
mention  that  the  rsis,  Madhucchandas  and  others,  were  the  seers 
of  the  mantras  of  the  Rg-Veda.  And  in  the  same  way  (it  is 
mentioned  by)  Bodhayana  and  others,  with  regard  to  the 
(Kandas)  parts  of  the  other  Vedas,  that  they  also  were  seen  by 
rsis .  Moreover,  the  Vedas  also  show  that  the  rites  are  to  be 
performed  with  mantras  after  knowing  their  seers.  For  instance, 
after  starting  with,  “Anyone  who  conducts  a  sacrifice  or  teaches 
with  a  mantra ,  of  which  he  does  not  know  the  seer,  the  metre, 
the  deity,  and  the  application,  enters  into  motionless  things  or 
falls  into  hell”,  it  is  said,  “Therefore  one  should  know  these  in 
every  mantra ”.  Furthermore,  virtuous  deeds  are  enjoined  for 
the  acquisition  of  happiness  by  creatures,  and  vicious  deeds  are 
prohibited  for  the  avoidance  of  sorrow.  And  likes  and  dislikes 
occur  in  respect  of  happiness  and  sorrow  that  are  known 
directly  or  from  the  scriptures,  but  not  in  respect  of  others. 
Accordingly,  it  follows  that  when  successive  creations  take 
place  as  the  result  of  virtue  and  vice,  they  are  brought  into 
existence  exactly  like  the  previous  creatiori.  Bearing  on  this  is 
a  Smfti  text:38  “Among  them,  the  creatures  that  had  adopted 
certain  courses  of  action  in  a  previous  creation,  adopt  those 


Vitfm-PurarM,  I.  v.  59-61;  Mbh.  sa.’  231.48-49. 


220  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [I.  iii.  30 

very  courses  when  created  again  and  again,  they  being  under 
the  influence  of  those  works,  be  they  injurious  or  non-in jurious, 
soft  or  cruel,  associated  with  virtue  or  vice,  and  true  or  false. 
Accordingly,  each  has  a  liking  for  his  respective  work.”  When 
this  universe  gets  dissolved,  it  dissolves  by  keeping  its  latent 
power  intact,  and  the  next  creation  emerges  from  that  latent 
power.  For  otherwise  it  will  all  be  a  matter  of  chance  (i.e. 
result  occurring  without  cause).  Now  we  cannot  imagine 
diverse  powers  of  different  kinds.39  That  being  the  case,  it  is  to 
be  understood  that  just  as  the  relation  between  the  senses  and 
the  sense-objects  is  fixed,  so  also  is  fixed  in  this  beginningless 
universe,  the  arrangement  of  the  succession  of  masses  of  crea¬ 
tures  like  gods,  men,  and  animals,  and  the  arrangement  of  castes, 
stages  of  life,  virtue  and  vice,  and  their  results,  which  originate 
after  intervening  breaks.  For  like  the  impossibility  of  fancying 
objects  for  the  sixth  organ,  it  is  not  possible  to  fancy  that  the 
pattern  of  behaviour,  as  manifested,  for  instance,  in  the  relation 
between  the  senses  and  the  sense-objects,  can  be  different  in 
every  fresh  creation.40  Therefore  from  the  facts  that  the  pattern 
of  behaviour  is  the  same  in  every  cycle  of  creation  and  that  the 
mighty  divine  beings  can  recollect  the  lives  in  the  earlier  cycles 
of  creation,  it  follows  that  the  particulars  in  each  creation 
emerge  with  the  same  (characteristics  of)  names  and  forms.  No 
contradiction  with  the  validity  of  the  Vedas  arises  from  holding 
that  the  universe  has  the  same  kind  of  names  and  forms  in  its 
cycles  (of  final  dissolution  and  fresh  creation).  The  similarity 
of  names  and  forms  is  shown  by  Vedic  texts  and  Smjtis:  “The 
ordainer  created  the  sun  and  moon,  as  also  heaven,  which  is  an 
abode  of  happiness,  the  earth,  and  interspace,  just  as  before” 
(R.  V.  X.  cxc.  3),  which  means  that  the  supreme  Lord  created 


*°  Nescience  being  the  only  power  admissible. 

"The  mind  is  the  sixth  organ  (Gita,  XV.  7).  It  has  no  distinct  object 
of  its  own,  for  happiness  etc.  are  cognized  by  the  Witness.  So  “fancying 
objects  for  the  sixth  organ”  means  thinking  of  a  nonentity.  Or  the 
meaning  is  that  there  is  no  sixth  organ  in  addition  to  the  eye  etc.,  and 
so  there  can  be  no  question  of  the  existence  of  its  objects.  As  for  the 
other  sense-organs  and  sense-objects,  there  is  a  fixity  of  relation;  for 
instance  colour  cannot  be  perceived  by  the  ear,  in  any  cycle  of  creation. 


I.  iii.  31] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


221 


the  universe  of  sun,  moon,  etc.  like  what  it  was  in  the  pre¬ 
vious  cycle.  ‘‘Fire  desired,  ‘I  shall  become  a  bestower  of  food 
to  the  gods.’  In  honour  of  the  (gods  of  the  stars  in  the) 
Krttika  constellation,  he41  performed  in  fire  a  sacrifice,  in  which 
was  offered  the  cakes  cooked  in  eight  plates”  (Tai.  Br.  III.  i. 
4.1),  where  the  text  shows  that  the  sacrificer  who  offered  the 
oblation  in  fire  in  the  course  of  performing  the  sacrifice  in 
honour  of  the  stars,  and  the  fire  into  which  the  offering  was 
made,  had  the  same  name  and  form.  Other  texts  of  a  similar 
purport  are  to  be  quoted  here.  There  are  Smrti  texts:  “To  the 
seers,  bom  after  the  end  of  dissolution,  the  unborn  One  imparts 
those  very  names  and  those  very  visions  of  the  Vedic  texts  as 
they  had  before.  As  the  signs  of  various  kinds  of  the  different 
seasons  are  seen  to  revolve  in  order,  in  that  very  way  all  the 
things  emerge  at  the  beginning  of  a  yuga  (cycle),  and  whatever 
forms,  peculiar  to  each,  the  beings  had  in  the  past,  those  exactly 
conform  to  these  of  the  present  beings — the  gods  being  similar 
to  the  gods  of  the  past  in  forms  and  names”  (Mbh.  Sa.,  231.58, 
210.17).  Such  other  texts  are  also  to  be  referred  to. 

Owing  to  impossibility  (of  competence)  *re-3rrfe<| 
in  the  Madhu-vidya  etc.,  drfirfH:  Jaimini  (asserts) 
incompetence. 

31.  Jaimini  asserts  (that  the  gods  and  others  have)  no  com¬ 
petence  (for  knowledge  of  Brahman )>  owing  to  the  impossibility 
of  their  competence  for  Madhu-vidya  etc . 

The  assertion  made  here  that  even  the  gods  have  competence 
for  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  being  challenged.  The  teacher 
Jaimini  holds  that  the  gods  are  disqualified. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  impossibility  of  their  being  qualified  for  the 
Madhu-vidya  (meditation  on  honey,  i.e.  the  successive  quin- 

41  The  sacrificer  performing  the  sacrifice  with  the  idea,  “I  shall  become 
fire,  the  eater  of  food”,  becomes  the  god  Fire  in  the  next  cycle,  and 
hence  he  is  called  Fire  even  when  he  is  a  sacrificer. 


222  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.iii.  31 

tessences  of  things),  etc.  If  their  competence  for  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman  be  admissible,  it  should  be  so  with  regard  to  Madhu~ 
Vidya  etc.  as  well,  for  they  too  are  equally  forms  of  vidya 
(knowledge).  But  this  is  not  possible. 

How? 

According  to  the  text,  “This  sun  is  madhu  (honey)  to  the 
gods”  (Ch.  III.  i.  1),  human  beings  should  meditate  on  the  sun 
by  superimposing  the  idea  of  honey  on  it.  If  the  gods  and  others 
be  accepted  as  (competent)  adorers,  then  which  other  sun  will 
the  (god)  Sun  adore?  Then  again,  after  introducing  the  five 
kinds  of  nectar,  red  and  the  rest,  that  exist  in  the  sun,  it  is  said 
that  the  five  groups  of  gods — Vasus,  Rudras,  Adityas,  Maruts, 
and  Sadhyas — subsist  on  these  nectars  seriatim.  After  this  in¬ 
struction,  it  is  shown  in  the  text  starting  with,  “He  who  medi¬ 
tates  on  this  nectar  thus,  becomes  one  with  the  Vasus  themselves 
and  gets  satisfied  by  seeing  this  nectar,  with  Fire  in  his  leading” 
(Ch.  III.  vi.  3),  that  those  who  know  the  honey  on  which  the 
Vasus  and  others  subsist  attain  the  glory  belonging  to  Vasus 
and  others.  But  whom  else  can  the  Vasus  and  others  know  as 
the  enjoyers  of  the  nectar?  And  what  other  glory,  belonging 
to  the  Vasus  and  others,  will  they  desire  to  get?  So  also  in 
other  places,  as  for  instance  in,  “Fire  is  a  quarter,  Air  is  a 
quarter,  the  Sun  is  a  quarter,  the  Directions  are  a  quarter”  (Ch. 
III.  xviii.  2),  “Air  is  indeed  the  place  of  merger”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  1), 
“The  sun  is  Brahman — this  is  the  instruction”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1), 
where  meditations  on  the  deities  themselves  are  enjoined,  and 
where  those  very  gods  cannot  be  qualified  for  undertaking 
those  very  meditations.  So  also  in  such  texts  as,  “These  two 
(ears)  are  Gotama  and  Bharadvaja:  This  one  is  Gotama,  and 
this  one  Bharadvaja”  (Br.  II.  ii.  4),  where  meditations  about  the 
seers  are  enjoined,  and  where  those  very  seers  cannot  be 
qualified  for  those  very  meditations. 

For  what  more  reason  are  the  gods  disqualified? 

sstfafa  ii^ii 

Tf  And  owing  to  the  occurrence  (of  words)  ssftfafa 

in  respect  of  a  sphere  of  light. 


I.  iii.  32]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  223 

32.  Because  of  the  occurrence  of  the  'words  in  respect  of  a 
sphere  of  light. 

To  this  sphere  of  light  exisiting  in  the  sky,  that  illumines  the 
world  by  rotating  throughout  day  and  night,  are  applied  such 
words  as  the  sun  etc.  which  are  indicative  of  gods;  because  in 
this  sense  of  a  mere  sphere  they  are  familiar  in  the  world  and 
are  recognized  as  such  in  the  complementary  portion  of  the 
text.42  Not  that  we  can  understand  any  connection  of  this 
sphere  of  light  with  any  human  form,  comprising  the  heart  etc., 
or  with  sentience,  desire  etc.;  for  it  is  known  to  be  insentient 
like  the  earth  etc.  Hereby  are  explained  away  fire  and  the  rest 
(which  are  equally  insentient). 

Objection :  No  such  fault  arises,  since  the  gods  are  known  to 
have  forms  etc.  from  the  mantras ,  corroborative  statements, 
anecdotes,  mythologies,  and  common  experience. 

Jaimini :  No,  for  there  is  no  such  independent  means  of  valid 
knowledge  called  common  experience.  Any  object  that  is  known 
through  the  well-known  means  of  knowledge,  such  as  percep¬ 
tion,  may  be  said  to  be  known  from  common  experience  when 
these  means  are  not  applied  with  careful  scrutiny.  But  with 
regard  to  the  matter  under  discussion,  none  of  the  valid  means 
of  proof — perception  and  the  rest — can  be  cited.  As  for  anecdote 
and  mythology,  they  too  originate  from  human  beings,  and 
hence  must  be  dependent  on  some  other  valid  means  for  their 
authenticity.  Vedic  corroborative  statements  are  also  subservient 
to  some  injunctions,  and  hence  they  cannot  prove  the  embo¬ 
diedness  etc.  of  the  gods  on  the  strength  of  any  independent 
meaning.  The  mantras  also,  that  are  applied  to  rites  according 
to  the  (six)  tests  of  Sruti  etc.  (direct  assertion,  indicatory  mark, 
syntactical  connection,  context,  position,  designation),  denote 
things  intrinsically  connected  with  ritual  application;  and 
accordingly  it  is  said  that  they  are  not  the  valid  means  of 
knowledge  of  any  object.  Hence  the  gods  have  no  comp¬ 
etence. 


"For  instance,  MAs  long  as  the  sun  will  rise  in  the  east  and  set  in  the 
west”,  occurring  at  the  end  of  Madhu-vidya. 


224  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iii.3J 

%  srermtsfor  %  113311 

<j  But  <n^iquf:  Badarayaga  (upholds)  qre(^  existence  (of 
competence)  for  aff^r  exists. 

33.  But  Badaraycnia  upholds  the  existence  of  competence  (for 
the  gods);  for  (the  requisite  for  competence)  exists  (in  them). 

Vedmtin :  The  word  “but”  rules  out  the  opposite  point  of 
view.  But  the  teacher  Badarayaga  thinks  that  competence  does 
exist  even  for  the  gods  and  others.  Although  the  gods  and  others 
cannot  have  any  competence  for  Madhu^vidyi  etc.,  where  the 
gods,  as  also  the  others,  get  intermingled,  still  they  have  the 
possibility  of  competence  for  pure  knowledge  of  Brahman,  since 
this  competence  is  dependent  on  desire,  ability,  non-prohibi¬ 
tion,  etc.  Not  that  competence  can  be  ruled  out  even  where  it 
is  possible,  just  because  it  is  impossible  somewhere  else.  Even  in 
the  case  of  men,  not  all  of  them  are  competent  for  all  things; 
for  instance,  the  Brahmagas  have  no  competence  for  the 
RJijasuya  sacrifice.  The  logic  that  applies  there,  applies  here  as 
well.  Under  the  topic  of  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  we  come 
across  a  Vedic  indicatory  mark  revealing  the  competence  of 
gods  and  others  for  the  knowledge  of  Brahman:  “And 
whosoever  among  the  gods  knew  that  Brahman  also  became 
that;  and  the  same  with  sages  and  men”  (Bp.  I.  iv.  10);  as  also, 
“They  said,  ‘Let  us  search  for  that  Self,  searching  for  which 
one  attains  all  the  worlds  and  all  the  desirable  things.’  Thinking 
thus,  Indra,  among  the  gods,  started  out  (for  Prajapati’s  place), 
and  so  did  Virocana  of  the  devils”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  2).  There  is 
a  similar  sign  in  the  Smjti  also;  as  for  instance  the  story  of 
Yajnavalkya  and  the  Gandharva  (Visvavasu).48 

And  it  was  argued:  “Because  of  the  occurrence  of  the  words 
in  respect  of  a  sphere  of  light”.  To  this  we  say:  Although  the 
words  sun  etc.  may  refer  to  a  sphere  of  light,  still  from  their 
use  in  the  sense  of  gods,  they  present  those  respective  gods  as 

48  Mahabharata,  Moksadharma,  where  the  Gandharva  Vi&vavasu  inquires 
and  learns  about  Brahman.  So  also  in  other  places  (tjg.  in  the  story  of 
Prahlada  and  Ajagara)  non-human  beings  get  this  knowledge. 


I.iii.33]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  - BHA§YA  225 

possessed  of  sentience  and  divine  powers;  for  these  words  are 
thus  used  in  the  mantras  and  corroborative  statements.  Being 
endowed  with  divine  power,  the  gods  certainly  have  the  capa¬ 
city  to  remain  in  identity  with  a  sphere  of  light  etc.,  and  also  to 
assume  various  bodies  at  will.  Thus  in  the  sentence,  “Come 
Indra,  thou  ram  of  Medhatithi”  etc.,  occurring  in  the  corro¬ 
borative  statement  about  Subrahmaoya  (the  priest  singing  the 
S;ima),  it  is  said,  “For  Indra,  in  the  form  of  a  ram,  carried 
Medhatithi  of  the  line  of  Kaijva”  ($a4vhh$a  Brahmana,  I.  1). 
In  the  Smtti  also  it  is  mentioned,  “The  sun  came  to  Kunti  by 
assuming  a  human  form.”  In  the  case  of  the  earth  etc.  also, 
sentient  presiding  deities  are  admitted  as  ruling  over  them,  for 
there  are  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “Earth  said”,  “Water  said”,  etc. 
($.  B.  I.  vi.  3.2-4).  We  pointed  out  that  in  the  case  of  the  sun 
and  the  rest,  the  material  substances  like  light  etc.  are  held  to 
be  insentient,  but  in  accordance  with  the  uses  in  the  mantras 
and  the  corroborative  statements,  their  presiding  deities  are  held 
to  be  sentient. 

As  for  the  argument  that  the  mantras  and  corroborative 
statements  are  meant  to  serve  some  extraneous  purpose,  so  that 
they  have  no  power  to  reveal  corporality  etc.  for  the  gods,  we 
say  that  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  thing  is  proved 
from  the  emergence  or  not  of  some  valid  knowledge  (from  the 
application  of  some  valid  means),  and  it  is  not  dependent  on 
whether  it  is  meant  for  some  other  purpose  (e.g.  rites)  or  not. 
For  instance,  a  man,  travelling  for  some  purpose,  certainly 
perceives  the  existence  of  grass  and  leaves  that  lie  on  the 
way. 

To  this  the  opponent  says:  The  analogy  is  inapt,  for  there 
the  means  of  perception  are  directly  in  contact  with  the  grass, 
leaf,  etc.  so  that  their  existence  becomes  known.  But  here  the 
corroborative  statement  conveys  its  purport  in  syntactical 
combination  with  another  sentence  meant  as  an  injunction:  and 
hence  it  cannot  be  made  to  mean  some  existing  thing  through  an 
independent  purport  of  its  own.  For  when  a  sentence  as  a  whole 
conveys  its  sense,  its  component  parts  are  not  admitted  to  have 
their  own  independent  purports  as  well.  Thus  from  the  sentence, 
“One  should  not  drink  wine”,  formed  with  a  negative  (not),  a 


I.iii.33]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  225 

possessed  of  sentience  and  divine  powers;  for  these  words  are 
thus  used  in  the  mantras  and  corroborative  statements.  Being 
endowed  with  divine  power,  the  gods  certainly  have  the  capa¬ 
city  to  remain  in  identity  with  a  sphere  of  light  etc.,  and  also  to 
assume  various  bodies  at  will.  Thus  in  the  sentence,  “Come 
Indra,  thou  ram  of  Medhatithi”  etc.,  occurring  in  the  corro¬ 
borative  statement  about  Subrahmaijya  (the  priest  singing  the 
Sama),  it  is  said,  “For  Indra,  in  the  form  of  a  ram,  carried 
Medhatithi  of  the  line  of  Kaijva”  (§a4vmtia  Brahmana ,  I.  1). 
In  the  Smjti  also  it  is  mentioned,  “The  sun  came  to  Kunti  by 
assuming  a  human  form.”  In  the  case  of  the  earth  etc.  also, 
sentient  presiding  deities  are  admitted  as  ruling  over  them,  for 
there  are  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “Earth  said”,  “Water  said”,  etc. 
(§.  B.  I.  vi.  3.2-4).  We  pointed  out  that  in  the  case  of  the  sun 
and  the  rest,  the  material  substances  like  light  etc.  are  held  to 
be  insentient,  but  in  accordance  with  the  uses  in  the  mantras 
and  the  corroborative  statements,  their  presiding  deities  are  held 
to  be  sentient. 

As  for  the  argument  that  the  mantras  and  corroborative 
statements  are  meant  to  serve  some  extraneous  purpose,  so  that 
they  have  no  power  to  reveal  corporality  etc.  for  the  gods,  we 
say  that  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  a  thing  is  proved 
from  the  emergence  or  not  of  some  valid  knowledge  (from  the 
application  of  some  valid  means),  and  it  is  not  dependent  on 
whether  it  is  meant  for  some  other  purpose  (e.g.  rites)  or  not. 
For  instance,  a  man,  travelling  for  some  purpose,  certainly 
perceives  the  existence  of  grass  and  leaves  that  lie  on  the 
way. 

To  this  the  opponent  says:  The  analogy  is  inapt,  for  there 
the  means  of  perception  are  directly  in  contact  with  the  grass, 
leaf,  etc.  so  that  their  existence  becomes  known.  But  here  the 
corroborative  statement  conveys  its  purport  in  syntactical 
combination  with  another  sentence  meant  as  an  injunction:  and 
hence  it  cannot  be  made  to  mean  some  existing  thing  through  an 
independent  purport  of  its  own.  For  when  a  sentence  as  a  whole 
conveys  its  sense,  its  component  parts  are  not  admitted  to  have 
their  own  independent  purports  as  well.  Thus  from  the  sentence, 
“One  should  not  drink  wine”,  formed  with  a  negative  (not),  a 
15 


226  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  3  3 

single  idea,  viz  the  prohibition  of  drinking,  is  understood  from 
a  combination  of  the  three  words  (not,  should  drink,  and  wine); 
but  from  a  connection  between  the  two  words  “wine”  and 
“should  drink”,  one  cannot  also  understand  an  injunction  of  the 
form,  “One  should  drink  wine”. 

Vedmtin :  To  this  the  answer  is:  The  analogy  is  not  inappro¬ 
priate.  It  is  quite  proper  that  in  the  matter  of  prohibition  of 
drinking  wine,  no  other  meaning  can  be  accepted  since  the 
words  combine  (in  a  single  construction)  round  a  single  idea. 
But  in  the  cases  of  injunction  and  corroboration,  the  words  in 
the  corroborative  portion  do  combine  to  denote  some  inde¬ 
pendent  existing  thing;  and  then  when  the  question  of  the 
purpose  to  be  served  is  raised,  they  become  corroborative  of 
the  injunction  as  far  as  possible.  Thus  in  the  sentence,  “One 
who  wants  prosperity  shall  sacrifice  a  white  goat  in  honour  of 
Air”  (Tai.  S.  II.  i.  1),  the  words  Air  etc.  occurring  in  this 
injunctive  sentence  are  directly  strung  up  with  the  injunction 
itself;  but  not  so  are  the  words  in  the  text,  “Air  is  indeed  a 
swift  deity.  He  runs  to  Air  himself  with  his  own  portion.  It  is 
he  who  brings  prosperity  to  this  (performer  of  sacrifice)” 
(Ibid.).  Here  the  words  occurring  in  this  corroborative  sentence 
are  not  to  be  construed  with  the  injunction,  for  Air  or  the 
swift  god  cannot  be  conjoined  with  the  injunctive  verb  to 
imply,  “Air  is  to  sacrifice”,  or  “the  swift  god  is  to  sacrifice”, 
and  so  on.  But  they  first  form  into  a  secondary  combination  for 
declaring  the  nature  of  Air,  and  then  eulogize  the  injunction  by 
conveying  the  idea  that  this  rite  has  such  a  distinguished  deity. 
Accordingly,  wherever  the  meaning  of  a  subsidiary  sentence  is 
known  to  be  true  from  some  other  valid  means  of  knowledge, 
the  corroborative  statement  proceeds  to  serve  its  purpose  by 
way  of  recapitulating  (or  recalling)  that  meaning.44  But  wher¬ 
ever  such  a  meaning  runs  counter  to  other  means  of  knowledge 
the  corroborative  statement  proceeds  by  way  of  an  interpreta¬ 
tion  in  the  sense  of  an  attribute.46  In  the  absence  of  both 


"For  instance,  “Fire  cures  cold” — Anuvada. 

"For  instance,  “The  sun  is  the  sacrificial  stake”,  where  the  meaning  is: 
"The  stake  is  bright  like  the  sun” — Gunavada. 


I.iii.33]  BRAHMA -SOTRA-BHASYA  227 

(contradiction  and  non-contradiction  with  other  means)46  the 
question  arises  as  to  whether  it  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the  attri¬ 
butive  sense,  since  there  is  no  other  valid  means  of  knowledge, 
or  it  is  to  be  interpreted  as  referring  to  some  existing  thing, 
since  there  is  no  conflict  with  other  means  of  knowledge.  When 
under  such  a  predicament,  people  who  stand  by  knowledge, 
should  interpret  it  to  mean  something  existing,  but  not  of  an 
attribute.  This  also  explains  the  standpoint  to  be  adopted  with 
regard  to  the  mantras ,47 

Moreover,  when  the  injunctions  enjoin  that  certain  oblations 
are  meant  for  the  gods — Indra  and  others — they  have  certainly 
an  eye  on  the  nature  of  those  gods — Indra  and  the  rest.  For 
Indra  and  others  cannot  be  conceived  of  by  the  mind  without 
the  help  of  their  own  characteristics;  nor  can  oblations  be 
offered  to  the  respective  gods  without  having  some  mental 
image  of  them.  And  the  Vedic  text  reads  thus:  “When  uttering 
the  mantra  Va$af  one  shall  meditate  on  the  deity  in  whose  honour 
the  oblation  is  taken  up”  (Ai.  Br.  III.  viii.  1).  It  cannot  be  said 
that  the  meaning  consists  in  nothing  but  the  words  themselves, 
(the  gods  being  nothing  more  than  the  words),  for  words  and 
meanings  are  not  identical  things.48  That  being  so,  anyone  who 
believes  that  the  Vedic  words  are  an  independent  source  of 
knowledge  cannot  deny  the  nature  of  the  gods — Indra  and 
others — just  as  it  is  found  in  the  mantras  and  corroborative 
statements.  Similarly,  the  anecdotes  and  mythologies,  based  on 
the  mantras  and  corroborative  statements,  can  supply  knowledge 
according  to  the  process  shown,  and  they  can  prove  the  cor- 
porality  of  the  gods  and  others.  Besides,  it  is  quite  possible 
that  the  anecdotes  and  mythologies  are  based  on  direct  percep¬ 
tion  (by  Vyasa  and  others).  For  things  imperceptible  to  us  can 

46  For  instance,  “Indra  with  a  thunder  in  hand — Bhutarthavada .  (See  f.n. 
54,  I.  i.  4),  where  Indra’s  existence  is  admitted. 

47  A  mantra  is  to  be  taken  in  its  literal  sense  when  it  is  not  a  recapitula¬ 
tion  of  something  already  known  and  it  does  not  contradict  known  facts. 
Thus  a  god  can  have  a  body,  since  the  mantras  and  corroborative  state¬ 
ments  say  so. 

"Should  it  be  postulated  that  the  mantras  mention  only  the  forms 
(species)  but  not  any  person,  the  answer  is:  A  form  cannot  exist  without 
a  person. 


228  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.iii.33 

be  perceptible  to  immortal  beings.  Thus  it  is  mentioned  in  the 
Smrtis  that  Vyasa  and  others  deal  directly  with  the  gods.  Any¬ 
one  saying  that  like  the  modern  beings,  the  ancient  ones  also 
had  no  capacity  to  deal  with  the  gods,  denies  variety  in  the 
world,  and  may  as  well  say  that  just  as  irf  the  modern  age,  so 
also  in  the  past,  there  was  no  K§atriya  king  ruling  over  the 
whole  earth.  He  will  also  have  to  set  his  face  against  the  injunc¬ 
tion  about  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice  etc.,  and  he  will  have  to  assume 
that  the  rules  of  caste  and  stages  of  life  were  as  unstable  in  other 
periods  as  at  present.  From  that  point  of  view,  he  will  also  set  at 
nought  the  scriptures  meant  for  establishing  norms  of  conduct. 
Hence  the  proper  position  is  that  the  immortal  beings  should 
have  dealings  with  the  gods  as  a  result  of  the  perfection  of  their 
virtue.  Besides,  the  Smrti  declares:  “From  the  repetition  of  the 
mantra  follows  the  proximity  to  (and  conversation  with)  one’s 
chosen  deity”  ( Yoga-sutra ,  II.  44).  Besides,  since  Yoga  is 
spoken  of  in  the  Smjti  as  leading  to  the  attainment  of  such 
mystic  powers  as  becoming  minute,  it  cannot  be  denied  by  a 
mere  bold  assertion.  The  Vedas  also  declare  the  glory  of  Yoga: 
“When  the  five  elements — earth,  water,  fire,  air,  space — have 
been  conquered,49  and  when  the  Yogic  powers  (of  becoming 
minute  etc.)  have  started  functioning,  then  for  the  aspirant,  who 
has  acquired  a  body  constituted  by  the  fire  of  Yoga,  there  is  no 
disease,  no  decrepitude,  no  death”  (Sv.  II.  12).  The  power -of 
the  seers  who  visualize  the  mantra  and  brdhmana  portions  of 
the  Vedas  are  not  to  be  measured  in  terms  of  our  power.  There¬ 
fore  the  anecdotes  and  mythologies  have  a  true  basis.  Common 
belief  too  should  not  be  dismissed  as  baseless  so  long  as  there 
is  some  probability.  Hence  it  is  proper  to  understand  from  the 
mantras  etc.  that  the  gods  and  others  have  bodies.  And  since  on 
that  account  they  can  have  aspiration  etc.,  their  competence  for 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  justifiable.  Moreover,  such  facts 

49  Thinking  on  the  different  parts  of  the  body  as  the  five  elements 
(from  the  soles  of  the  feet  to  knees — earth;  knees  to  navel — water;  navel 
to  neck — fire;  neck  to  where  the  hair  of  the  head  starts— *-air;  from  there 
to  the  crown  of  the  head — space),  and  bringing  them  under  control 
through  such  thoughts  of  identity. 


229 


I.  iii.  34]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 

as  gradual  emancipation,  mentioned  in  the  Vedas,  become  logi¬ 
cal  from  this  standpoint. 

Topic  9:  Pseudo-Sudra 

ff  ll^ll 

arcu  To  him  occurred  grief  on  hearing 

his  disparagement  ^J-aTTsT^TT^  as  is  evident  from  his  approach¬ 
ing  him  for  this  is  hinted  at. 

54.  To  him  (i.e.  Jdnasruti)  occurred  grief  on  hearing  his 
(i.e.  swarfs)  disparaging  utterance ,  as  is  evident  from  his 
(JdnasrutPs)  approaching  him  ( Raikva ),  for  this  is  hinted  at 
(by  Raikva  by  using  the  word  Sudra). 

It  may  be  argued  that,  even  as  any  hard  and  fast  rule  about 
the  competence  of  men  alone  is  denied  and  the  competence  of 
the  gods  as  well  for  different  kinds  of  knowledge  is  upheld, 
similarly  by  denying  any  monopoly  of  qualification  by  the  three 
classes  of  the  twice-born  alone,  the  Siidras  also  may  be  accepted 
as  qualified.  In  order  to  remove  such  art  assumption  is  begun 
the  present  topic. 

Opponent :  Now  then,  the  apparent  conclusion  is  that  a 
Sudra  also  is  qualified,  for  he  can  have  the  aspiration  and  ability. 
And  unlike  the  prohibition,  “Therefore  the  Sudra  is  unfit  for 
performing  sacrifices”  (Tai.  S.  VII.  i.  1.6),  no  prohibition 
against  his  acquisition  of  illumination  is  met  with.  Even  the 
disqualification  for  sacrifices  that  arises  for  the  Sudra  from  the 
fact  of  his  not  being  qualified  for  lighting  a  sacrificial  fire,  is  no 
sign  of  his  being  debarred  from  knowledge.  For  it  is  not  a  fact 
that  a  man  who  has  no  fire — Ahavanlya  and  the  rest — cannot 
acquire  knowledge.  Moreover,  there  is  an  indicatory  sign  con¬ 
firming  the  Sudra’s  competence.  In  the  section  dealing  with  the 
knowledge  of  samvarga  (merger  of  all  things),  Janasruti,  grand¬ 
son  of  Putra  and  an  aspirant  of  knowledge,  is  referred  to  by 
the  word  Sudra:  “Fie,  O  Sudra,  keep  to  yourself  the  chariot 
and  the  necklace,  together  with  the  cows”  (Ch.  IV.  ii.  3).  And 
in  the  Smjtis  are  mentioned  Vidura  and  others  as  born  in  the 


230  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  [I.  iii.  34 

Sudra  caste  but  endowed  with  special  knowledge.  Hence  Sudras 
have  competence  for  different  kinds  of  knowledge. 

Ved&ntin :  Faced  with  this,  we  say:  The  Sudra  has  no 
competence,  since  he  cannot  study  the  Vedas;  for  one  becomes 
competent  for  things  spoken  of  in  the  Vedas,  after  one  has 
studied  the  Vedas  and  known  these  things  from  them.  But 
there  can  be  no  reading  of  the  Vedas  by  a  Sudra,  for  Vedic 
study  presupposes  the  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread,  which 
ceremony  is  confined  to  the  three  castes.  As  for  aspiration,  it 
cannot  qualify  anyone  unless  one  has  the  ability.  Mere  ability  in 
the  ordinary  sense  also  cannot  qualify  anyone;  for  scriptural 
ability  is  needed  in  a  scriptural  matter.  But  this  scriptural  ability 
is  denied  by  the  prohibition  of  the  right  to  study.  As  for  the 
text,  <4The  Sudra  is  unfit  for  performing  a  sacrifice”  (Tai.  S. 
VII.  i.  1.6),  since  it  is  based  on  a  logic  having  common  applica¬ 
tion,  it  suggests  that  the  Sudra  has  no  right  to  knowledge  as 
well,  for  the  logic  applies  both  ways.  And  what  you  take  for 
an  indicatory  mark  occurring  in  the  section  dealing  with  the 
knowledge  about  merger,  that  is  no  mark  at  all,  for  there  is  no 
logic  behind  it.  An  indicatory  mark  becomes  suggestive  when 
stated  logically;  but  that  logic  is  lacking  here.  Granted  even 
that  this  mark  qualifies  the  Sudra  for  the  samvarga-vidyi  (medi¬ 
tation  on  merger)  alone,  because  it  occurs  there,  still  it  cannot 
qualify  him  for  all  kinds  of  knowledge.  The  fact,  however,  is 
that  this  word  Sudra  cannot  guarantee  his  competence  any¬ 
where,  because  it  occurs  in  a  corroborative  statement  (Artha- 
vada).  On  the  contrary,  this  word  Sudra  can  be  construed  with 
some  one  already  having  the  competence. 

How? 

The  answer  is:  On  hearing  this  utterance  of  the  swan,  “Hullo, 
who  is  this  one,  insignificant  as  he  is,  of  whom  you  speak  as 
though  he  were  like  Raikva  of  the  chariot?”  (Ch.  IV.  i.  3), 
which  was  a  personal  disparagement  for  him,  JanaSruti,  grandson 
of  Putra,  was  struck  with  grief  ( suk ).  Raikva  hinted  at  this 
grief  by  using  the  word  Sudra,  thereby  revealing  his  own  power 
of  television.  This  is  what  we  can  understand.  For  a  born  Sfidra 
has  no  right  to  knowledge. 


I.  iii.  35  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  23 i 

How,  again,  is  it  suggested  by  the  word  Sudra  that  he  was 
struck  with  grief? 

The  answer  is:  “ Tat-ddravandt Because  the  word  Sudra 
can  be  split  up  thus  to  mean  that  he  (Raikva)  approached 
towards  ( abhidudrava )  that  (tat)  grief  ( sucam );  or  he  was 
approached  (abhidudruve)  by  that  (tat)  sorrow  (sued)',  or  he 
rushed  (abhidudrava)  to  that  (tat)  Raikva,  because  of  sorrow 
(sued).  And  this  derivative  meaning  has  to  be  accepted  because 
the  conventional  meaning  is  inadmissible.  Moreover,  this  mean¬ 
ing  is  obvious  from  the  story  itself. 

f^ng;  113x.11 

tT  And  owing  to  his  K$atriyahood  being  known 

K*T  later  on  from  the  indicatory  mark  of  men¬ 

tion  along  with  a  descendant  of  Citraratha. 

35.  And  because  his  Kfotriyahood  is  known  later  on  pom  the 
indicatory  mark  of  his  mention  along  with  a  descendant  of 
Citraratha. 

For  this  further  reason  JanaSruti  is  not  a  Sudra  by  birth,  for 
from  a  consideration  of  the  topic  it  transpires  that  he  is  a 
K$atriya,  which  fact  becomes  obvious  from  his  suggestive 
mention  later  on  along  with  the  K$atriya  Abhipratarin  of  the 
line  of  Citraratha.  Later  on  in  the  complementary  portion  of 
the  section  on  the  knowledge  about  the  merger  (Samvarga- 
vidya)  Abhipratarin  of  the  line  of  Citraratha  is  mentioned  as  a 
K$atriya  in,  “Now  then,  a  Brahmacarin  begged  of  Saunaka  of 
the  line  of  Kapi,  and  Abhipratarin,  son  of  Kak$asena,  when 
they  were  being  served  by  the  cook”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  5).  That 
Abhipratarin  belonged  to  the  line  of  Citraratha  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  from  his  association  with  a  descendant  of  the  line  of 
Kapi;  for  the  association  of  the  descendant  of  Citraratha  with 
that  of  Kapi  is  known  from  the  text,  “The  Kapeyas  made 
Citraratha  perform  this  (Dvirdtra  sacrifice)”  (Tandy a  Brdhmana, 
XX.  xii.  5).  For  the  people  of  the  same  lineage  generally  have 
the  priests  of  a  common  descent.  Besides,  it  is  known  that  he 
was  a  K$atriya  from  the  text,  “From  him  issued  one  named 


232  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iii.  35 

Citrarathi  who  was  a  K$atriya  king”,  where  we  find  him  to 
be  a  K$atriya  king.  Accordingly,  the  mention  of  JanaSruti  along 
with  the  K$atriya  Abhipratarin,  in  the  context  of  the  same  kind 
of  knowledge,  suggests  that  the  former  is  a  K$atriya;  for  equals 
are  generally  found  to  be  mentioned  together.  Moreover,  Jana- 
Sruti  is  known  to  be  a  K$atriya  from  the  fact  of  his  despatching 
a  K$atta50  and  his  possession  of  riches.  Hence  a  bom  Sudra  has 
no  right  to  knowledge. 

ll^U 

On  account  of  the  mention  of  purificatory 
rites  ^  and  declaration  of  the  absence  of 

these. 

36.  Because  purificatory  rites  are  mentioned  (for.  others)  and 
absence  of  these  is  declared  (for  the  Sudra). 

For  the  additional  reason  that,  in  the  contexts  where  knowl¬ 
edge  is  spoken  of,  such  actions  for  acquiring  the  right  to 
knowledge  are  declared  as  investiture  with  the  sacred  thread 
etc.,51  for  instance,  “Him  he  vested  with  the  sacred  thread” 
(S.  B.  XI.  v.  3.13),  “Uttering  the  sacred  formula,  ‘Teach  me 
venerable  sir’,  he  approached”  (Ch.  VII.  i.  1),  “They,  who 
were  adepts  in  the  Vedas,  adhered  to  the  qualified  Brahman, 
but  were  intent  on  an  inquiry  about  the  supreme  Brahman, 
went  to  the  venerable  Pippalada  with  sacrificial  faggot  in  hand, 
under  the  belief,  ‘This  one  will  certainly  tell  us  about  It’  ” 
(Pr.  I.  1).  And  the  text,  “Even  without  initiating  them”  (Ch. 
V.  xi.  7),  only  shows  that  those  (who  were  exempted  from 
initiation)  had  it  already.  The  absence  of  purificatory  rites  for 
the  Sudra  is  mentioned  in  the  Sm^ti  thus:  “The  Sudra  belongs 
to  the  fourth  caste  and  has  but  a  single  birth”  (Manu,  X.  4), 
as  also  in  such  texts  as,  “The  Sudra  has  no  sins,  nor  is  he  fit  for 
any  purificatory  rite”  (Manu,  X.  126). 

“One  bom  of  a  mixed  parentage — from  a  Sudra  father  and  Ksatriya 
mother  or  of  a  slave  woman — whose  duty  was  to  drive  chariots,  wait 
on  princes,  and  so  on. 

”  Etc.— study,  service  of  the  teacher,  and  so  on. 


I.iii.38]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  233 

xf  Moreover  STT^:  on  account  of  inclination  having  arisen 
when  the  absence  of  that  had  been  ascertained. 

37.  And  because  (Gautama's)  inclination  arose  (to  initiate  and 
instruct  Satyakama)  when  the  absence  of  that  (Sudrahood)  had 
been  ascertained . 

Here  is  an  additional  reason  why  a  Sudra  has  no  right.  When 
owing  to  the  utterance  of  truth  (by  Satyakama  Jabala),  the 
absence  of  Sudrahood  had  been  established,  then  Gautama 
proceeded  to  initiate  and  instruct  (Satyakama)  Jabala,  which 
fact  is  gathered  from  an  indicatory  sign  in  the  Upani$ad:  “No 
non-Brahmaga  can  dare  utter  such  a  truth.  O  amiable  one, 
bring  sacrificial  faggot,  I  shall  initiate  you  because  you  did  not 
depart  from  truth”  (Ch.  IV.  iv.  5). 

%hu[ i ll^ll 

^  And  hearing,  study,  acquisition  of 

meaning  are  prohibited  ^ \ :  according  to  Smrti. 

38.  And  because  the  Sntfti  prohibits  for  the  Sudra  the  hearing , 
study y  and  acquisition  of  the  meaning  (of  the  Vedas). 

This  is  another  reason  why  the  Sudra  has  no  right:  By  the 
Smjrti  he  is  debarred  from  hearing,  studying,  and  acquiring  the 
meaning  of  the  Vedas.  The  Smjti  mentions  that  a  Sudra  has  no 
right  to  hear  the  Vedas,  no  right  to  study  the  Vedas,  and  no 
right  to  acquire  the  meaning  of  the  Vedas  (and  perform  the 
rites).  As  for  prohibition  of  hearing,  we  have  the  text,  “Then 
should  he  happen  to  hear  the  Vedas,  the  expiation  consists  in 
his  ears  being  filled  with  lead  and  lac”52,  and  “He  who  is  a 
Sudra  is  a  walking  crematorium.  Hence  one  should  not  read  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  a  Sudra”58.  From  this  follows  the  prohibi¬ 
tion  about  study.  How  can  one  study  the  Vedas  when  they  are 
not  to  be  recited  within  his  hearing?  Then  there  is  the  chopping 


“Gau.  Dh.  XII.  4 


M  Vasi?tha,  18 


234  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.iii.3* 

off  of  his  tongue  if  he  should  utter  the  Vedas,  and  the  cutting 
of  the  body  to  pieces  if  he  should  commit  it  to  memory54.  From 
this  it  follows  by  implication  that  the  acquisition  of  meaning 
and  acting  on  it  are  also  prohibited,  as  is  stated  in,  “Vedic 
knowledge  is  not  to  be  imparted  to  a  Sudra”55,  and  “Study, 
sacrifice,  and  distribution  of  gifts  are  for  the  twice-born”56.  But 
from  those  to  whom  knowledge  dawns  as  a  result  of  (good) 
tendencies  acquired  in  the  past  lives,  as  for  instance  to  Vidura, 
Dharmavyadha,  and  others,  the  reaping  of  the  result  of  knowl¬ 
edge  cannot  be  withheld,  for  the  result  of  knowledge  is 
inevitable.  This  position  is  confirmed  by  the  Snqti  text,  “One 
should  read  out  to  the  four  castes  (keeping  the  Brahma^a  in 
front)”57,  which  declares  the  competence  for  all  the  four  castes 
for  the  acquisition  of  the  anecdotes  and  mythologies.  But  the 
conclusion  stands  that  a  Sudra  has  no  right  to  knowledge  through 
the  Vedas. 


Topic  10:  Vibration 

nun 

39 .  (Prana  is  Brahman)  because  of  (the  mention  of)  vibration . 

The  side  issue  about  competence  is  concluded.  Now  we  revert 
to  the  discussion  of  the  meanings  of  texts  we  were  engaged  in. 
By  following  the  root  meaning  of  the  verb  ejr  which  is  “to 
vibrate”  (to  move),  this  aphorism  refers  to  the  text,  “All  this 
universe  that  there  is,  emerges  and  vibrates  because  there  is 
Prana  that  is  a  great  terror  like  an  uplifted  thunder.  Those  who 
know  this  become  immortal”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  2).  In  this  sentence 
we  hear  of  the  whole  creation  pulsating  on  Prana  as  its  support, 
and  of  some  great  source  of  fear  that  is  imminent  and  is  men¬ 
tioned  by  the  word  thunder,  as  also  of  the  attainment  of  immor¬ 
tality  from  that  knowledge. 

Opponent :  Now  in  this  context,  a  deliberation  is  bound  to 
arise,  since  it  is  not  clear  as  to  what  that  Prana  is  and  what  that 

M  Gau.  Dh.  Sun  XII.  4  “  Manu,  IV.  80 

MGau.  Dh.  SO.,  IX.  1  OTMbh.  Sa.,  327.  49 


I. iii.39]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  235 

terrible  thunder  is.  When  such  a  deliberation  ensues,  we  arrive 
at  the  conclusion  that  the  familiar  vital  force,  with  its  five  func¬ 
tions,  is  the  Prana.  And  from  familiar  use,  the  thunder  must  be 
the  thunderbolt.  This  is  a  eulogy  of  Prana . 

How? 

All  this  creation  pulsates  by  getting  its  support  on  air,  called 
Prana ,  having  five  functions.  And  it  is  through  the  energy  of  air 
that  the  thunderbolt  is  lifted  up;  for  they  say  that  when  air 
moves  about  in  the  form  of  clouds,  then  there  are  the  move¬ 
ments  (or  flashes)  of  lightning,  roar  of  clouds,  rain,  and  thunder. 
And  this  immortality  ensues  from  the  knowledge  of  air  itself. 
In  support  of  this  occurs  another  Upani$adic  text,  “Air  is  the 
particular  (separate  parts)  and  air  is  the  genus  (or  whole).  He 
who  knows  this  conquers  accidental  death”  (Bf.  III.  iii.  2). 
Therefore  the  entity  here  is  to  be  understood  as  air. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  position,  we  say:  Brahman  Itself 
is  to  be  understood  here. 

Why? 

From  a  consideration  of  what  precedes  and  succeeds;  for  we 
notice  that  in  the  earlier  and  following  texts,  it  is  Brahman  that 
is  dealt  with.  So  why  should  we,  all  of  a  sudden,  understand  air 
in  this  verse  alone?  In  an  earlier  verse  we  have,  “That  is  bright 
(pure),  that  is  Brahman;  and  that  is  called  immortality.  On  It  is 
fixed  all  the  universe.  It  is  this  that  nothing  can  transcend”  (Ka. 

II.  iii.  1),  where  Brahman  is  mentioned.  That  Brahman  is  spoken 
of  here  as  well  because  of  proximity.  Besides,  from  the  recogni¬ 
tion  of  Its  being  the  support  of  the  universe,  as  stated  in,  “This 
whole  universe  that  emerges  and  moves  because  Prana  is  there” 
(Ka.  II.  iii.  2),  it  is  understood  that  Brahman  is  referred  to. 
Moreover,  even  this  word  Prana  is  used  for  the  supreme  Self, 
since  we  find  such  a  use  in  the  Upani$ad  as,  “ Prana  of  Prana 
(Vital  force  of  vital  force)  (Br.  IV.  iv.  18).  This  power  to 
move  (the  whole  universe)  also  fits  in  with  the  supreme  Self, 
but  not  with  mere  air  (of  which  the  vital  force  is  a  form). 
It  has  been  said  accordingly,  “No  mortal  lives  by  Prana  or 
Apana  (exhaling  or  inhaling),  but  all  live  by  something  else  on 
which  these  two  depend”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  5).  Later  on  too,  Brahman 
and  not  air  is  declared  in,  “From  fear  of  Him  fire  bums,  from 


236  BRAHMA- SCTRA-BHA5YA  [I.iii.39 

fear  shines  the  sun;  from  fear  run  Indra  and  Air,  and  Death,  the 
fifth”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  3),  where  Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  the  source 
of  fear  for  the  whole  universe  including  Air.  Furthermore, 
from  the  fact  of  proximity  and  from  the  recognition  of  the 
identity  of  the  source  of  fear  as  indicated  in,  “A  source  of 
terror  like  an  uplifted  thunder”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  3),  it  can  be  under¬ 
stood  that  the  same  Brahman  is  declared  here  as  well.  The  word 
thunder  is  used  on  account  of  the  similarity  of  striking  terror. 
Even  as  the  king’s  subjects  and  others  continue  ever  under  the 
rule  of  the  king  under  the  fear,  “This  uplifted  thunder  will  fall 
on  my  head  unless  I  obey  his  rule”,  similarly  this  universe  of 
fire,  air,  sun,  etc.  continues  in  its  own  course  out  of  fear  of  this 
very  Brahman.  So  Brahman  is  likened  to  a  terrifying  uplifted 
thunder.  Similar  is  another  Upani$adic  text  about  Brahman: 
“Out  of  His  fear  the  Wind  blows.  Out  of  fear  the  Sun  rises. 
Out  of  His  fear  runs  Fire  as  also  Indra,  and  Death,  the  fifth” 
(Tai.  II.  viii.  1).  From  the  mention  of  immortality  as  the  result 
(of  knowledge),  it  is  understood  that  Brahman  Itself  is  this 
Entity;  for  it  is  known  from  the  verse,  “Knowing  Him  alone 
one  attains  immortality.  There  is  no  other  path  to  proceed  by” 
(Sv.  VI.  15),  that  immortality  results  from  the  realization  of 
Brahman.  As  for  the  immortality  (referred  to  by  the  opponent 
and)  declared  in  some  contexts  as  resulting  from  the  knowledge 
of  Air  (Hiragyagarbha),  that  is  merely  relative;  for  in  that 
very  (Bfhadaraijyaka)  Upani$ad,  the  text  turns  to  another  topic 
and  after  speaking  of  the  supreme  Self,  it  declares  the  perishable¬ 
ness  of  all  else — Air  and  the  rest — in,  “Everything  else  is  perish¬ 
able”  (Bf.  III.  iv.  2).  From  the  context  under  discussion  as  well, 
the  supreme  Self  stands  established,  for  the  question  asked  is: 
“Tell  (me)  of  that  thing  which  you  see  as  different  from  virtue, 
different  from  vice,  different  from  this  cause  and  effect,  and 
different  from  the  past  and  the  future”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14). 

Topic  11:  Light  as  Declared  in  the  Upani$ad 

IIVo|| 

szftfo:  Light  owing  to  its  being  met  with. 


I.  iii.  40]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  237 

40.  Light  is  Brahman ,  for  it  is  met  with  as  such  (in  the  Upa- 
ni$ad). 

Doubt :  In  the  Upani$ad  it  is  heard,  “This  serene  one 
( samprasada ),  rising  up  from  this  body,  and  realizing  the 
supreme  Light,  becomes  established  in  his  own  nature”  (Ch. 
VIII.  xii.  3).  The  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  word  light 
refers  to  the  light  visible  to  the  eye  and  dispelling  darkness,  or 
to  supreme  Brahman.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  It  must  be  the  common  light. 

Why? 

Because  the  word  light  conventionally  means  this.  Under  the 
aphorism,  “Light  is  Brahman,  because  of  the  mention  of  feet” 
(I.  i.  24),  it  was  of  course  shown  that  from  the  force  of  the 
context,  the  word  light  gives  up  its  own  meaning  and  implies 
Brahman.  But  no  cause  for  discarding  the  common  meaning  is 
noticed  here.  Similarly  in  the  chapter,  dealing  with  the  nerves, 
the  attainment  of  the  sun  by  the  aspirant  for  liberation  is  spoken 
of  thus:  “Now  (after  the  loss  of  consciousness)  when  one 
departs  from  this  body  in  this  way  (befitting  death),  then  one 
proceeds  upward  along  these  very  rays  (associated  with  the 
nerves)”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  5).  Accordingly  the  familiar  light  is 
meant  by  the  word  light  here. 

Vedantin:  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  The  supreme 
Brahman  Itself  is  meant  by  the  word  light. 

Why? 

“Because  it  is  met  with  in  that  sense  in  the  Upani$ad”.  It  is 
obvious  in  this  context  that  Brahman  is  repeatedly  alluded  to 
as  the  subject-matter.  Thus  in  the  beginning  of  the  topic,  the 
Self  that  is  possessed  of  such  characteristics  as  freedom  from 
sin  and  so  on,  as  mentioned  in,  “The  Self  that  is  free  from  sin” 
(Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  is  declared  as  the  entity  to  be  searched  for 
and  to  be  aspired  after  for  realization.  It  is  also  alluded  to  in, 
“I  shall  explain  this  very  one  to  you  over  again”  (Ch.  VIII. 
ix.  3).  And  this  Self  stands  declared  from  the  fact  of  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  this  Light  for  the  sake  of  becoming  unembodied,  as 
mentioned  in,  “Happiness  and  sorrow  do  not  certainly  touch 
one  who  has  become  unembodied”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  1);  for  unless 


238 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.  iii.  40 


it  be  by  identity  with  Brahman,  there  can  be  no  unembodied- 
ness  anywhere  else.58  Another  reason  for  this  is  the  use  of  such 
attributes  as  “supreme  Light”  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  4),  “the  tran¬ 
scendental  Being”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3).  As  for  the  criticism  that 
the  attainment  of  the  sun  by  the  aspirant  for  liberation  is  spoken 
of,  that  is  not  the  absolute  liberation  inasmuch  as  it  is  dependent 
on  a  course  to  be  followed,  and  that  after  departure  from  the 
body.  We  shall  state  later  on  that  in  the  case  of  the  absolute 
liberation,  there  are  no  such  things  as  a  course  to  be  followed 
or  departure  from  the  body. 

Topic  12:  Space  is  Brahman,  Being  Different  from 
Name  and  Form 


IIV?II 


3TTCTO:  Space  are-apd  since  it  is  declared  as 

being  something  else  and  so  on. 


41.  Akasa  (Space)  is  Brahman ,  because  of  the  declaration  of 
being  something  different  and  so  on. 

Doubt :  In  the  Upanisad  we  hear:  “That  which  is  called 
akasa  is  the  accomplisher  of  name  and  form.  That  in  which 
they  are  contained  is  Brahman;  that  is  immortal  and  that  is  the 
Self”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1).  Now  the  discussion  arises,  whether  the 
word  akasa  denotes  the  supreme  Brahman  or  the  familiar  mate¬ 
rial  space. 

Opponent :  Under  such  a  predicament,  it  is  reasonable  to 
accept  the  element  called  space  (ether);  for  the  word  aka$a 
conventionally  means  that,  and  the  fact  of  the  accomplishment 
of  name  and  form  can  fit  in  with  it  in  the  sense  of  providing 
space  (for  them).  Besides,  nothing  that  can  be  a  clear  indica¬ 
tion  of  Brahman,  as  for  instance,  creatorship,  is  heard  of  here. 

Veddntin:  This  aphorism  is  enunciated  to  meet  that  position. 
The  supreme  Brahman  alone  can  be  the  meaning  of  the  word 
akasa  (Space)  here. 

“The  embodied  Sun  cannot  be  this  goal,  and  establishment  in  one’s 
own  nature  does  not  mean  becoming  something  else.  So  the  Self,  and 
not  the  Sun,  is  the  goal. 


I. iii. 42]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  239 

Why? 

“Because  of  the  declaration  of  Its  being  something  different 
and  so  on.”  For  by  saying,  “That  in  which  they  are  contained 
is  Brahman”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1),  it  is  declared  that  dkasa  is  some¬ 
thing  different  from  name  and  form.  Nothing  but  Brahman  can 
be  different  from  name  and  form,  since  the  whole  of  creation 
consists  of  a  manifestation  of  name  and  form  (i.e.  word  and  its 
meaning).  And  the  manifestation  of  name  and  form  in  an 
absolute  sense  is  not  possible  for  anything  but  Brahman;  for 
the  Upani$ad  mentions  that  Brahman  is  the  agent  of  their  revela¬ 
tion:  “Let  me  manifest  name  and  form  by  Myself  entering  as 
the  individual  soul”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2). 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  matter  of  direct  experience  that  the 
individual  being  also  has  the  power  of  manifesting  name  and 
form? 

Vedantin:  True,  he  has;  but  the  intention  (of  the  text,  “by 
Myself  entering  as  the  individual  soul”)  is  to  declare  the  identity 
of  the  individual  and  Brahman  (and  not  the  agentship  of  the 
individual).  From  this  very  declaration  of  the  manifestation  of 
name  and  form,  creatorship  etc.,  as  the  indicatory  signs  of 
Brahman  become  stated  ipso  facto .  The  sentences,  “That  is 
Brahman;  that  is  immortal;  that  is  the  Self”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1) 
are  also  indications  that  Brahman  is  spoken  of.  This  is  an  elabora¬ 
tion  of  the  aphorism,  “Space  is  Brahman,  for  Brahman’s 
characteristic  is  in  evidence”  (I.  i.  22). 

Topic  13:  Sleep  and  Death 

(Because  of  the  declaration)  as  being  different  *T^Fh- 

in  sleep  and  death. 

42.  Because  of  the  declaration  of  being  different  in  sleep  and 
at  the  time  of  departure ,  (the  supreme  Lord  is  the  subject - 
matter  of  teaching). 

The  portion,  “Because  of  the  declaration”  follows  (from  the 
earlier  aphorism)  to  complete  the  sense. 


240 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA?YA 


[I.  iii.  42 


Doubt :  In  the  sixth  part  of  the  Bfhadaraoyaka  Upani§ad,  the 
start  is  made  with,  “‘(Of  all  the  entities  cognized  through  the 
idea  of  I)  which  is  the  Self?’  ‘This  infinite  entity  ( Puru$a )  that  is 
identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  the  organs, 
the  self-effulgent  light  within  the  heart  (i.e.  in  the  intellect)’” 
(IV.  iii.  7),  and  then  the  subject  of  the  Self  is  amply  elaborated. 
The  doubt  arises  whether  that  text  is  concerned  simply  with 
the  explanation  of  the  true  nature  of  the  transmigrating  soul, 
or  with  establishing  the  true  nature  of  the  transcendental  Self. 
What  should  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  It  is  concerned  only  with  the  true  nature  of  the 
transmigrating  soul. 

How  do  you  know? 

From  a  consideration  of  the  start  and  finish.  At  the  start,  an 
indicatory  sign  of  the  embodied  soul  is  found  in,  “the  entity  that 
is  identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  the  organs”, 
and  the  non-rejection  of  that  soul  is  found  at  the  end  in,  “That 
which  is  identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
organs  is  this  great  birthless  Self’  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  22);  that  very  soul 
is  dealt  with  elaborately  in  the  middle  also  through  a  presenta¬ 
tion  of  the  waking  state  etc. 

Vedantin :  Under  these  circumstances,  we  say:  This  text  is 
meant  for  speaking  about  the  supreme  Lord  alone,  and  it  is  not 
meant  for  speaking  further  about  the  embodied  soul. 

Why? 

Because  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  and  at  the  time  of  departure 
from  the  body,  the  supreme  Lord  is  mentioned  separately  from 
the  embodied  soul.  In  sleep  for  instance,  the  supreme  Lord  is 
mentioned  separately  from  the  embodied  soul  in,  “So  this  Puru$a, 
being  fully  embraced  by  the  supremely  intelligent  Self — prdjna 
dtmd — does  not  know  anything  at  all,  either  external  or  internal” 
(Bf.  IV.  iii.  21).  In  that  text  the  Puru$a  must  be  the  embodied 
soul,  since  it  is  he  who  is  the  knower  inasmuch  as  the  knowledge 
of  anything  external  or  internal  can  be  denied  only  when  the 
possibility  of  knowing  exists.  And  the  supremely  intelligent  Self 
is  the  supreme  Lord,  for  He  is  never  separated  from  intelligence 
(prajnd)  which  is  of  the  nature  of  omniscience.  So  also  at  the 
time  of  departure  the  supreme  Lord  is  mentioned  separately 


I.  iii. 42]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  241 

from  the  individual  in,  “So  does  the  embodied  soul,  being 
presided  over  by  the  supremely  intelligent  Self,  go  making 
noises”  (Bf.  IV.  iii.  35).  There  too  the  embodied  soul  must 
be  the  individual  being,  since  it  is  the  master  of  the  body;  but 
the  supremely  intelligent  One  must  be  the  supreme  Lord  Him¬ 
self.  Therefore  from  the  separate  mention  in  sleep  and  at  the 
time  of  departure,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  entity  sought 
to  be  taught  here  is  the  supreme  Lord.  In  answer  to  the  argu¬ 
ment  that  from  the  indicatory  signs  of  the  individual  soul  at 
the  start,  middle,  and  end,  it  follows  that  this  text  is  meant  for 
presenting  the  soul,  we  say:  The  nature  of  the  transmigrating 
soul  is  not  sought  to  be  presented  at  the  start  in  the  sentence, 
“that  is  identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  the 
organs”. 

What  is  meant  then? 

The  intention  is  to  show  the  identity  of  the  transmigrating 
soul  with  the  supreme  Self  after  a  restatement  of  the  former’s 
characteristics.  For  the  succeeding  text,  viz  “it  meditates  as  it 
were,  it  runs  as  it  were”  etc.  (Bf.  IV.  iii.  7),  is  seen  to  be  devoted 
to  the  elimination  of  the  characteristics  of  the  transmigrating 
soul.  Similarly  at  the  end,  as  at  the  start,  the  conclusion  runs 
thus,  “That  Self  which  is  identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in 
the  midst  of  the  organs  is  this  great  birthless  Self’  (Bj*.  IV. 
iv.  22).  The  idea  conveyed  is  that  the  transmigrating  soul,  that 
is  perceived  as  identified  with  the  intellect  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  organs,  is  proved  by  us  to  be  but  this  great  birthless  Self, 
the  supreme  Lord.  But  one  who  would  infer,  from  the  presenta¬ 
tion  of  the  waking  state  etc.,  in  the  middle,  that  the  nature  of 
the  transmigrating  soul  is  sought  to  be  taught  here,  may  as  well 
pop  up  in  the  western  direction  when  sent  towards  the  east, 
for  the  presentation  of  the  states  of  waking  etc.,  is  meant  neither 
to  imply  the  possession  of  any  state  nor  of  transmigration. 

What  is  meant  then? 

What  is  meant  is  freedom  from  the  states  and  transmigration. 

How  is  that  known? 

Because  at  every  turn  Janaka  requests  Yajnavalkya:  “Please 
instruct  me  further  about  liberation”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  14-16,  33), 
and  because  the  answer  given  at  every  step  is:  “He  is  untouched 
16 


242  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAgYA  [I.  iii.  42 

by  whatever  he  sees  in  that  state,  for  this  infinite  Being  is 
unattached”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  15-16).  Further,  it  is  stated,  “(This 
aspect  of  his)  is  untouched  by  good  work  and  untouched  by 
bad  work,  for  he  is  then  beyond  all  the  woes  of  his  heart  (intel¬ 
lect)”  (Bf.  IV.  iii.  22).  Accordingly,  it  is  to  be  understood  that 
this  text  is  meant  for  establishing  the  nature  of  the  super¬ 
mundane  Self. 


From  such  words  as  ruler. 

43.  This  is  confirmed  by  such  words  as  ruler . 

Here  is  an  additional  reason  why  this  text  is  to  be  understood 
as  establishing  the  nature  of  the  supermundane  Entity;  for  the 
words  ruler  etc.,  occurring  in  this  text,  are  calculated  to  estab¬ 
lish  the  nature  of  the  supermundane  Entity  and  to  rule  out  the 
nature  of  the  transmigrating  soul.  Of  these  two  objectives,  such 
sentences  as,  “It  is  the  controller  of  all,  the  lord  of  all,  the 
ruler  of  all”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  22),  are  meant  for  establishing  the 
nature  of  the  supermundane  Entity;  and  such  sentences  as,  “It 
does  not  bdcome  better  through  good  work,  nor  worse  through 
bad  work”  (ibid.),  are  meant  for  denying  the  nature  of  trans¬ 
migration.  Hence  it  is  understood  that  the  supreme  Lord,  who 
is  not  subject  to  transmigration,  is  spoken  of  here. 


Section  IV 


Topic  1:  The  Inferred  Entity 


After  broaching  the  subject  of  the  deliberation  on  Brahman, 
the  definition  of  Brahman  was  given:  “That  is  Brahman  from 
which  the  birth  etc.,  of  this  are  derived”  (B.  S.  I.  i.  2).  Then  the 
doubt  was  raised  that  this  definition  applies  equally  to  Pradhana 
(primordial  Nature),  and  it  was  dismissed  by  saying,  “Because 
of  the  attribution  of  seeing,  the  one  (viz  Pradhana)  which  is 
not  taught  in  the  Upani$ads  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe” 
(I.  i.  5),  the  reason  being  that  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Upa- 
ni$ads.  It  was  also  shown  in  the  earlier  portion  of  this  book  that 
the  sameness  of  the  knowledge  imparted  by  the  Upani$ads  is 
in  favour  of  the  belief  in  Brahman  as  the  cause  (I.  i.  10),  but 
not  in  favour  of  the  theory  that  Pradhana  is  the  cause.  Now 
are  being  raised  some  doubts  not  considered  hitherto. 

Opponent :  The  assertion  made  that  Pradhana  is  not  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Upani$ads  is  groundless;  for  in  some  sections  are 
heard  words  calculated  to  suggest  Pradhana.  So  it  comes  to  this 
that  when  the  great  seers  Kapila  and  others  adopted  the  causality 
of  Pradhana,  they  did  so  on  the  authority  of  th%  Vedas  them¬ 
selves.  Accordingly,  as  long  as  those  words  are  not  proved  to 
convey  some  other  meaning,  so  long  the  theory  that  Brahman 
is  the  cause  will  remain  under  doubt,  even  though  it  has  been 
proved  earlier. 

Vedantin  :  Hence  the  succeeding  topic  starts  with  a  view  to 
showing  that  they  mean  something  else: 


3f  mh  ifnfa 


^  u?n 


anffirfaq?*!  The  inferred  entity  arfq-  even  (is  revealed) 
to  the  followers  of  some  recension  ^  if  this  be  the  con¬ 
tention,  (then)  ?r  not  so  since  it  is 

cognized  as  occurring  in  a  simile  illustrating  the  body  ^  and 
(the  Upani$ad)  shows  (this). 


244  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iv.  1 

1.  If  it  be  said  that  even  the  inferred  entity  (Pradhana)  is 
revealed  to  the  followers  of  some  recension ,  we  say ,  not  so,  for 
the  word  is  cognized  as  occurring  in  a  simile  illustrating  the 
body .  And  the  Upanifad  also  shows  this. 

Opponent :  Even  the  inferred  entity,  even  Pradhana,  arrived 
at  through  inference,  is  met  with  by  the  followers  of  some 
recensions,  as  having  been  mentioned  by  name.  For  the  Katha 
Upani$ad  has  this  reading:  “The  unmanifest  ( avyakta )  is  higher 
than  mahat ,  puru$a  is  higher  than  avyakta ”  (I.  iii.  11),  where 
mahat,  avyakta ,  and  puru$a  are  found  exactly  under  the  same 
epithets  and  in  the  same  order  as  they  are  known  from  the 
(Samkhya)  Smrtis.  Of  these,  by  the  word  avyakta  is  meant 
Pradhana,  well  known  in  the  Samkhya  Smrti,  for  the  word 
avyakta  is  in  common  use  in  the  Samkhya  Smrti,  and  being 
devoid  of  sound  etc.  (Ka.  I.  iii.  15),  it  can  be  derived  in  the  sense 
of  that  which  is  not  manifest  (na  vyakta).  Having  been  men¬ 
tioned  thus  in  the  Upani$ad,  it  remains  unproved  that  it  is  not 
mentioned.  Now  that  very  Pradhana  is  the  cause  of  the  universe, 
it  being  well  known  to  be  so  from  the  Upani$ads,  Smrtis,  and 
reason. 

Vedantin :  This  is  not  so.  This  sentence  of  the  Katha  Upa- 
ni$ad  is  not  meant  for  proving  the  existence  of  the  avyakta  and 
mahat  of  the  Samkhyas.  For  we  do  not  come  here  across  the 
very  same  Pradhana,  as  it  is  taught  in  the  Samkhya  Smrtis  as  an 
independent  cause  constituted  by  its  three  (component)  attri¬ 
butes.  The  only  identical  thing  we  come  across  is  the  mere  word 
avyakta,  which  from  its  derivative  sense  of  that  which  is  not 
manifest  can  be  applied  equally  to  any  other  subtle  and  inscru¬ 
table  thing.  And  this  word  does  not  conventionally  mean  any 
particular  thing.  As  for  such  a  conventional  usage  among  the 
followers  of  the  theory  of  Pradhana,  that  is  only  a  technical 
term  for  them,  and  as  such,  it  cannot  be  adduced  as  a  reason  for 
ascertaining  the  meaning  of  a  Vedic  text.  The  identity  of  a 
thing  cannot  be  established  merely  from  the  similarity  of  the 
order  of  treatment,  unless  the  nature  of  the  thing  itself  is  recog¬ 
nized  as  identical;  for  unless  one  is  a  fool,  one  will  not  conclude 
by  seeing  a  cow  in  a  stable  that  it  must  be  a  horse.  From  a 


I.  iv.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  245 

consideration  of  the  context  also,  the  Pradhana,  fancied  by 
others,  does  not  emerge  as  the  meaning,  “for  the  word  is  cog¬ 
nized  as  occurring  in  a  simile  illustrating  the  body”.  The  body 
in  fact,  occurring  in  the  simile  of  the  chariot,  is  understood  here 
by  the  word  avyakta. 

How? 

On  the  strength  of  the  context  and  the  method  of  residue. 
Thus  the  text,  immediately  preceding,  shows  how  the  Self, 
body  etc.,  are  analogous  to  the  master  of  the  chariot,  chariot, 
etc.  (respectively) :  “Know  the  Self  as  the  master  of  the  chariot, 
and  the  body  as  the  chariot.  Know  the  intellect  as  the  charioteer, 
and  the  mind  as  verily  the  bridle.  They  call  the  senses  the  horses; 
know  the  objects  (of  the  senses)  as  the  ways.  The  discriminat¬ 
ing  people  call  that  Self,  associated  with  the  body,  senses,  and 
mind,  as  the  experiencer”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  3-4).  And  then  it  is,  shown 
that  one  attains  the  worldly  state  through  those  organs  etc., 
when  they  are  not  under  control;  but  that  when  they  are  under 
control,  one  “reaches  the  end  of  the  road  that  is  the  highest 
place  of  Vi$ou”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  7-9).  When  after  this  has  been 
shown,  the  desire  arises  to  know  what  that  highest  place 
of  Vi$iju  is,  the  text  shows  that  the  supreme  Self  is  tran¬ 
scendental  to  those  very  senses  etc.,  that  are  under  discussion, 
and  that  It  is  at  the  end  of  the  road  and  is  the  highest  place  of 
Vi$gu:  “The  sense-objects  are  higher  than  the  senses,  and  the 
mind  is  higher  than  the  sense-objects;  but  the  intellect 
is  higher  than  the  mind  and  the  great  soul  ( mahan  Utma)  is 
higher  than  the  intellect.  Avyakta  is  higher  than  mahat,  Puru$a 
is  higher  than  avyakta .  There  is  nothing  higher  than  Puru$a. 
He  is  the  culmination,  He  is  the  highest  goal”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  10-11). 
The  very  senses  etc,,  that  were  spoken  of  as  the  horses  etc.,  in 
the  imagery  of  the  chariot  are  (to  be  understood  as)  spoken  of 
here  in  this  text  as  well,  so  that  the  fault  of  giving  up  the 
subject-matter  under  discussion  and  taking  up  something  else, 
not  within  purview,  may  not  arise.  Of  these,  the  words  senses, 
mind,  and  intellect  occur  in  common  in  the  preceding  and 
present  texts.  The  sense-objects,  namely  such  things  as  sound 
and  the  rest,  were  mentioned  as  the  road  for  the  senses,  con¬ 
ceived  of  as  horses.  They  (the  objects)  are  higher  than  the 


246 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.  iv.l 


senses,  in  accordance  with  the  fact  well  known  in  the  Upani$ad 
(Bj\  IIL  ii.  1-6)  that  the  senses  are  the  grahas  and  the  sense- 
objects  are  the  ati-grahas.1  The  mind  is  superior  to  the  sense- 
objects,  for  the  interactions  between  the  sense-organs  and  sense- 
objects  are  based  on  the  mind.  The  intellect  is  superior  to  the 
mind,  for  the  objects  of  experience  approach  the  experiencer 
by  riding  on  the  intellect.  That  great  soul  ( mahan  dtma)  that  is 
higher  than  the  intellect  (Ka.  I.  iii.  10)  is  presented  in  the  words, 
“Know  the  Self  ( dt?nd )  as  the  master  of  the  chariot”  (Ka.  I. 
iii.  3). 

How? 

Because  the  word  Self  ( dtma )  is  used,  and  because  the 
experiencer  can  reasonably  be  superior  to  the  objects  of 
experience.  Further  Its  greatness  is  justifiable  because  It  is  the 
master.  Or  by  the  phrase  mahan  atma  (Ka.  I.  iii.  10)  is  meant 
here  the  intellect  of  the  first-born  Hiratiyagarbha  which  is  the 
highest  basis  of  the  intellects  of  all  beings  in  accordance  with 
the  Smfti,  “That  which  is  read  of  by  the  learned  people  as 
mind  (i.e.  the  power  of  thinking),  pervasive,  presentiment  (i.e. 
power  of  determining  the  future),  soul,  the  refuge  (of  all 
enjoyable  things),  intellect  (power  of  determining  the  present), 
(power  of)  fame,  (power  of)  rulership,  intuition  (of  things  of 
all  times),  (power  of)  expression,  consciousness,  memory  (of 
all  the  past)”  (Mbh.  XIII.  x.  11),  and  in  accordance  with  the 
Upani$ad,  “He  who  created  Hiraijyagarbha  in  the  beginning  and 
transmitted  the  Vedas  to  Him”  (Sv.  VI.  18).  That  (cosmic 
intellect)  was  mentioned  there  in  the  earlier  verse  by  the  simple 
word  intellect;  and  therefore  to  make  the  idea  clearer,  it  is 
mentioned  here  separately  (in  its  cosmic  aspect);  for  that  intel¬ 
lect  too  is  justly  higher  than  ours.  But  on  this  interpretation, 
according  to  which  the  word  Puru$a  in  the  latter  text  (Ka.  I. 
iii.  11)  is  accepted  as  implying  the  supreme  Self,  the  individual 
soul  which  is  the  master  of  the  chariot  becomes  enumerated 
ipso  facto,  for  in  reality  there  is  no  difference  between  the 
supreme  Self  and  the  soul  identified  with  the  intellect.  So  the 

xGraha  is  that  which  perceives,  hence  an  organ.  Atigraba  is  that  which 
is  greater  than  a  graha,  hence  sense-objects  determining  the  nature  of  the 
perception. 


I.  iv.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  247 

body  alone,  among  those  (six)  factors  (Ka.  I.  iii.  3-4)  is  left 
over.  With  a  view  to  leading  to  the  realization  of  the  supreme 
state,  the  Upani$ad  (Ka.  I.  iii.  10-11)  goes  on  enumerating 
seriatim  those  other  factors  themselves  that  were  being  discussed 
(in  Ka.  I.  iii.  3-4).  While  engaged  thus,  the  Upani$ad  (after 
pairing  off  the  others),  points  out  the  remaining  factor,  viz 
body  occurring  in  the  earlier  passage  (Ka.  I.  iii.  3),  by  the 
remaining  factor,  viz  avyakta  in  the  present  text  (Ka.  I.  iii.  11). 
This  is  how  we  understand  it.  For  what  is  sought  here  to  be 
taught  is  the  realization  of  the  identity  with  Brahman,  which  is 
the  inmost  Self,  by  the  experiencer  (i.e.  the  individual  soul) 
who  is  under  ignorance  and  is  associated  with  body,  senses, 
mind,  intellect,  and  experiences  of  sense-objects.  This  is  done 
for  him  by  chalking  out  the  path  of  liberation  from  the  worldly 
state  with  the  help  of  the  comparison  of  the  body  and  the  rest 
with  a  chariot  etc.  Thus  it  is  that  the  place  of  Vi$i)u  is  spoken  of 
as  difficult  of  approach  in  the  verse:  “He  is  hidden  in  all  beings; 
and  hence  He  does  not  appear  as  the  Self  of  all.  But  by  the 
seers  of  subtle  things,  He  is  seen  through  a  pointed  and  fine 
intellect”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  12).  Then  Yoga  meant  for  its  realization  is 
revealed  in:  “The  discriminating  man  should  merge  that  mind 
into  the  cognizing  self;  he  should  merge  the  cognizing  self  into 
the  ntahan  atma  (great  soul);  he  should  merge  the  great  soul 
into  the  peaceful  Self”  (I.  iii.  13).  The  idea  implied  is  this:  “He 
should  merge  the  organ  of  speech  into  the  mind”  means  that  he 
should  give  up  all  the  external  activities  of  the  organs  of  speech 
etc.,  and  continue  to  act  only  through  the  mind;  and  because 
the  mind  also  has  a  tendency  to  think  of  objects,  he  should 
discover  the  defect  inherent  in  thinking  of  pros  and  cons,  and 
then  he  should  hold  the  mind  confined  steadfastly  in  the  intel¬ 
lect  that  has  the  faculty  of  determination  and  is  referred  to  by 
the  term  “cognizing  self”.  That  intellect,  again,  he  should  with¬ 
draw  into  the  great  soul,  the  experiencer,  or  into  the  acute  intel¬ 
lect,  sharpened  through  meditation.  The  great  soul  is,  however, 
to  be  established  by  him  in  the  peaceful  Self,  in  the  supreme 
Purusa  under  consideration,  that  is  to  say,  in  the  “highest  goal” 
(Ka.  I.  iii.  11).  Thus  when  we  run  through  the  context,  preced- 


248  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iv.  1 

ing  and  succeeding,  there  remains  no  scope  for  Pradhana  pointed 
out  by  others. 


irii 

$  Rather  the  subtle  for  it  deserves  that. 

2.  Rather  the  subtle  (causal  state)  is  meant  (by  avyakta) }  for 
it  deserves  that  epithet. 

It  has  been  said  that  on  the  strength  of  the  context  and  the 
method  of  residue  the  word  avyakta  refers  to  the  body  and 
not  Pradhana.  But  the  doubt  arises  now:  How  can  the  body  be 
called  avyakta  (unmanifest)?  For  from  the  fact  of  its  grossness, 
the  body  deserves  the  term  manifest  all  the  more,  whereas  the 
term  unmanifest  ( avyakta )  is  meant  for  something  indistinct  (or 
undeveloped). 

Hence  the  answer  is  being  offered:  But  here  the  subtle  one— 
the  body  in  its  causal  state — is  sought  to  be  spoken  of;  for  the 
subtle  (cause)  deserves  to  be  mentioned  by  the  word  unmani¬ 
fest.  Though  this  body  is  gross  and  cannot  in  itself  be  called 
unmanifest,  still  the  subtle  elements  from  which  it  is  produced 
can  be  called  unmanifest.  And  the  word  denoting  the  material 
cause  is  seen  to  apply  to  its  product  also  as  for  instance  in,  “The 
Soma  juice  is  to  be  mixed  with  the  cows  (i.e.  cow’s  milk)” 
(Ijjt.  V.  IX.  xlvi.  4).  The  Upani$adic  text,  “This  universe  was  then 
undifferentiated”  (Bj.  I.  iv.  7)  also  shows  that  this  very  world, 
diversified  through  names  and  forms,  was  in  the  beginning  in 
a  state  of  latency,  devoid  of  differentiation  into  names  and  forms, 
and  hence  fit  to  be  called  undifferentiated. 

ll^ll 

Being  dependent  on  that;  it  serves  some 

purpose. 

3.  (Avyakta  is  not  Pradhana)  because  it  is  dependent  on  that 
(God);  (but  this  avyakta  has  to  be  admitted  as)  it  serves  some 
purpose. 


I.  iv.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  249 

The  opponent  argues  here:  If  it  be  admitted  that  when  in  the 
beginning  the  world  was  in  its  causal  state,  and  remained  undif¬ 
ferentiated  through  names  and  forms  it  was  fit  to  be  called 
unmanifest,  and  if  it  be  held  that  in  a  similar  state  the  body 
also  could  be  called  unmanifest,  then  that  amounts  to  an  admis¬ 
sion  of  the  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause;  for  the  primordial 
(undifferentiated)  state  of  this  very  universe  is  called  Pradhana. 

Vedantin :  To  this  it  is  said:  Should  we  admit  some  primal 
state  as  an  independent  cause  of  the  world,  we  shall  be  opening 
the  door  for  the  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause.  But  this  primal 
state  is  held  by  us  to  be  subject  to  the  supreme  Lord,  but  not 
as  an  independent  thing.  That  state  has  to  be  admitted,  because 
it  serves  a  purpose.  Without  that  latent  state,  the  creatorship  of 
God  cannot  have  any  meaning,  inasmuch  as  God  cannot  act 
without  His  power  (of  Maya),  and  without  that  latent  state, 
the  absence  of  birth  for  the  freed  souls  cannot  be  explained.2 

Why? 

Because  liberation  comes  when  the  potential  power  (of 
Maya)  is  burnt  away  by  knowledge.  That  potential  power, 
constituted  by  nescience,  is  mentioned  by  the  word  unmanifest. 
It  rests  on  God,  and  is  comparable  to  magic.  It  is  a  kind  of  deep 
slumber  in  which  the  transmigrating  souls  sleep  without  any 
consciousness  of  their  real  nature.  This  thing,  that  is  avyaktay 
is  sometimes  referred  to  by  the  word  space,  as  stated  in  the  text, 
“By  the  Immutable,  O  GargI,  is  (the  unmanifest)  space  per¬ 
vaded”  (By.  III.  viii.  11).  Sometimes  it  is  called  the  immutable  as 
in,  “Higher  than  the  higher  immutable”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2);  sometimes 
it  is  called  Maya  as  in,  “Know  Maya  to  be  Nature  and  the 
master  of  Maya  to  be  the  great  God”  (Sv.  IV.  10).  That  Maya 
is  surely  unmanifest,  for  it  can  neither  be  ascertained  as  real 
nor  as  unreal.  This  is  why  it  has  been  stated  that  “ Avyakta  is 
higher  than  mahai ”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  11);  for  if  the  cosmic  intelligence 
of  Hiraoyagarbha  be  meant  by  the  word  mahat ,  then  avyakta.  is 
higher  than  mahat ,  for  mahat  springs  from  the  former.  If, 
however,  the  individual  being  be  the  meaning  of  mahat  (vide 


•That  power  of  Maya  has  to  be  admitted  whose  presence  makes  birth, 
death  etc.,  possible,  and  whose  cessation  brings  about  liberation. 


250  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iv.3 

end  of  commentary  on  I.  iv.  1),  still  the  statement,  “Avyakta 
is  higher  than  mahat ”,  is  admissible,  since  the  state  of  becoming 
an  individual  creature  depends  on  the  influence  of  avyakta 
(Maya)  acting  as  a  limiting  adjunct.  For  ignorance  is  avyakta, 
and  it  is  because  of  the  possession  of  ignorance  by  the  individual 
soul  that  all  kinds  of  empirical  behaviour  continue  for  ever. 
This  superiority  to  mahat ,  that  avyakta  has,  is  also  fancied  in  the 
case  of  its  modification,  the  body  itself,  by  thinking  of  them  as 
figuratively  identical.  Although  the  organs  are  as  much  the  pro¬ 
ducts  of  avyakta  as  the  body,  still  the  identity  is  figuratively 
fancied  in  the  case  of  the  body  alone,  whence  it  is  spoken  of  as 
avyakta y  the  organs  having  already  been  referred  to  by  their 
own  names,  and  the  body  alone  haying  been  left  over  (to  be 
paired  off  with  avyakta).* 

Pseudo-V edantin :  Others  explain  that  the  bodies  are  of  two 
kinds — gross  and  fine.  The  gross  one  is  what  is  directly  per¬ 
ceived,  and  the  fine  will  be  referred  to  later  on  in,  “The  soul 
goes  out  of  the  body,  enveloped  with  the  subtle  parts  of  the 
elements,  with  a  view  to  obtaining  a  fresh  body;  so  it  is  known 
from  the  question  and  answer  in  the  scripture”  (B.  S.  III.  i.  1). 
Both  these  bodies  were  equally  described  earlier  as  the  chariot. 
But  the  fine  body  is  mentioned  here  by  the  word  avyakta;  for 
the  fine  deserves  that  epithet.  And  since  all  behaviour,  asso¬ 
ciated  with  bondage  or  freedom  is  “dependent  on  this”  fine 
body,  it  is  higher  than  the  individual  being.  This  is  just  like 
saying  that  the  sense-objects  are  higher  than  the  senses  owing 
to  the  dependence  of  the  senses  on  their  objects. 

V edantin :  But  they  have  to  answer  this  question:  Since  in 
the  earlier  text  both  the  bodies  were  described  in  common  as 
the  chariot,  and  since  both  are  equally  under  discussion  here  in 
the  latter  text,  and  both  remain  to  be  enumerated  (i.e.  paired 
off),  why  should  the  fine  body  alone  be  mentioned  here  and 
not  the  gross? 

Pseudo-V  edantin :  We  can  only  interpret  the  meaning  of 
what  is  stated  by  the  scripture,  but  cannot  question  it.  And  the 

“The  senses  etc.  are  mentioned  in  Ka.  I.  iii.  3-4  and  1.  iii.  10,  and  the 
gross  body  in  Ka.  I.  iii.  3. 


I.  iv.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  251 

word  used  by  the  scripture  is  avyakta ,  which  can  mean  only 
the  fine  and  not  the  reverse,  that  being  vyakta  (manifest). 

Vedantirt:  Not  so,  for  the  meaning  has  to  be  determined  by 
keeping  the  unity  of  purport  in  view.  Not  that  these  words, 
mentioned  earlier  and  later,  can  convey  any  sense  without 
getting  connected  through  a  common  purport,  for  that  will 
lead  to  the  fault  of  giving  up  something  under  discussion  and 
taking  up  something  extraneous.  And  unity  of  purport  cannot 
exist  unless  the  subsequent  portion  is  connected  with  the  earlier 
by  way  of  completing  some  idea.  Now  since  the  completion 
of  the  idea  requires  the  consideration  of  both  the  bodies  equally, 
the  unity  of  purport  itself  will  be  vitiated,  unless  the  relation¬ 
ship  between  the  two  (earlier  and  later)  parts  be  admitted  in 
accordance  with  this  requirement.  In  that  case  how  can  the 
meaning  of  any  scriptural  expression  be  understood?  Besides,  it 
is  not  to  be  thought  thus:  “The  fine  body  is  mentioned  here 
because  it  is  difficult  to  be  purified;4  but  the  gross  one  is  so 
palpably  repugnant  that  it  can  be  easily  purified,  and  hence  it 
is  not  mentioned.”  For  the  purification  of  anything  is  not 
intended  to  be  spoken  of  here,  inasmuch  as  no  verb  occurs  here 
to  enjoin  purification.  But  since  “the  highest  place  of  Vi$riu” 
(Ka.  I.  iii.  9)  was  pointed  out  in  the  immediately  preceding 
verse,  the  question  arises,  “What  is  it?”  Hence  the  intention 
here  (Ka.  I.  ii.  11)  is  to  speak  of  that  place.  Accordingly,  it  is 
pointed  out  in  succession  that  a  certain  thing  is  higher  than  the 
one  preceding  it;  and  then  it  is  declared,  “There  is  nothing 
higher  than  Puru§a”  (ibid.).  However  we  lose  nothing  by 
accepting  any  one  of  these  two  points  of  view,  since  both  are 
calculated  to  demolish  the  inferred  entity,  Pradhana.  So  it  may 
well  be  as  you  put  it. 

IMI 

^  And  ^ owing  to  the  non-mention  of  being 
known. 

4.  And  because  (avyakta  is)  not  mentioned  as  an  entity  to 
be  known. 


4  Ascertained  that  it  is  not  the  Self,  that  is  to  say  eliminated. 


252  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [I.iv.4 

Pradhana  is  presented  in  the  Samkhya  Smjti  as  a  thing  to  be 
known,  since  according  to  them,  freedom  (or  the  detachment  of 
the  soul  from  Nature)  ensues  from  knowing  the  difference 
between  the  gunas  (that  constitute  Pradhana)  and  puru$a  (soul). 
One  cannot  know  the  puru$a  to  be  different  from  the  three 
gunas,  unless  one  has  known  the  nature  of  the  gurias.  And  at 
places  they  mention  Pradhana  as  a  thing  to  be  known  for  the 
sake  of  acquiring  supernatural  powers.  But  here  in  the  Upa- 
ni$ad,  this  avyakta  is  not  mentioned  as  a  thing  to  be  known,  the 
term  avyakta  being  used  as  a  mere  epithet.  There  is  no  other 
text  to  show  that  avyakta  is  either  to  be  known  or  adored. 
Moreover,  it  cannot  be  upheld  that  the  knowledge  of  the  term 
avyakta  itself  can  lead  to  some  fruitful  human  result  even  though 
it  be  not  enjoined  as  such  in  any  scripture;  (for  that  alone  can 
be  understood  as  a  thing  to  be  known  which  has  been  enjoined 
as  such).  From  this  point  of  view  also,  Pradhana  is  not  referred 
to  by  the  word  avyakta.  Our  standpoint,  on  the  contrary  is 
beyond  cavil,  since  according  to  us  this  word  avyakta  is  used 
with  a  view  to  revealing  the  state  of  Vi$ou  by  a  process  of  fol¬ 
lowing  the  comparison  of  the  body  etc.,  with  the  chariot  etc. 

snift  m*h 

(The  Upani$ad)  does  speak  ^  if  this  be  the  con¬ 
tention  not  so;  because  5 TT5T:  the  conscious  Self  (stands  out) 
from  the  context. 

5.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  Upanifad  does  mention  Pradhana 
(by  the  word  avyakta ),  we  say :  No,  for  the  conscious  Self  is 
understood  from  the  context. 

Here  the  Samkhya  says :  The  aphorism,  “And  because  avyakta 
is  not  mentioned  as  an  entity  to  be  known”,  remains  unproved. 

How? 

For  later  on  we  hear  of  Pradhana,  mentioned  by  the  word 
avyakta ,  as  a  thing  to  be  known,  in  the  text,  “One  becomes 
freed  from  the  jaws  of  death  by  knowing  that  which  is  sound¬ 
less,  touchless,  colourless,  undiminishing,  and  also  tasteless, 
eternal,  odourless,  without  beginning  and  without  end,  higher 


I.  iv.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  253 

than  mahat,  and  ever  constant”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  15).  Pradhana,  pre¬ 
sented  in  this  text  for  the  sake  of  knowledge,  conforms  exactly 
to  the  Pradhana  mentioned  in  the  Smfti  as  being  devoid  of  sound 
etc.,  and  higher  than  mahat .  Hence  it  is  Pradhana  that  is  declared 
here,  and  that,  again,  is  pointed  out  by  the  word  avyakta . 

Veddntin :  To  this  we  say:  Pradhana  is  not  presented  here  as 
a  thing  to  be  known;  on  the  contrary  we  understand  that  the 
conscious  Self,  which  is  the  supreme  Self,  is  presented  here  for 
realization. 

How  is  it  so? 

From  the  context.  It  is  the  topic  of  the  conscious  Self  that 
spreads  out  elaborately;  because  it  is  declared,  “There  is  nothing 
higher  than  Puru$a.  He  is  the  culmination,  He  is  the  highest 
goal”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  11),  and  so  on;  and  because  by  mentioning  the 
inscrutability  of  the  Self,  the  curiosity  to  know  that  very  Self 
is  roused  by  the  text,  “He  is  hidden  in  all  beings,  and  hence  He 
does  not  appear  as  the  Self  (of  all)”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  12);  and  because 
the  control  of  the  organs  of  speech  etc.,  is  enjoined  for  the  sake 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  alone  in,  “The  discriminating  man 
should  merge  (the  organ  of)  speech  into  the  mind”  (Ka.  I.  iii. 
13);  and  because  the  result  is  the  delivery  from  the  mouth  of 
death  (Ka.  I.  iii.  15).  For  it  is  not  held  by  the  Samkhyas  that  one 
becomes  freed  by  knowing  Pradhana  alone,  their  theory  being 
that  one  becomes  free  by  knowing  the  sentient  soul.  Besides,  in 
all  the  Upani§ads,  such  attributes  as  soundlessness  etc.,  are 
vouched  for  the  conscious  Self  alone.  Hence  it  is  not  Pradhana 
that  is  the  thing  to  be  known  here,  nor  is  it  meant  by  the  word 
avyakta . 


wii?  srcw  \\\\\ 

And  of  the  three  tr*  only  is  the  presentation 

tppj  thus  ^  and  the  question. 

6.  And  thus  there  is  the  presentation  of  three  things  alone9 
and  the  question  also  is  concerned  with  them. 

An  additional  reason  why  Pradhana  is  neither  meant  by  avyakta , 
nor  is  it  a  thing  to  be  known  is  that  three  things  alone — Fire, 


254  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  6 

individual  soul,  and  the  supreme  Self — are  met  with  in  this  book, 
the  Katha  Upani$ad,  as  things  presented  for  being  spoken  of  in 
conformity  with  the  granting  of  the  boons;  and  the  question 
also  relates  to  them.  No  other  thing  is  asked  for,  nor  is  it  pre¬ 
sented.  Of  these,  the  question  about  Fire  is  contained  in,  “O 
Death,  such  as  you  are,  you  know  that  Fire  which  leads  to 
heaven.  Of  that  you  tell  me  who  am  full  of  faith”  (Ka.  I.  i.  13). 
The  question  about  the  individual  soul  occurs  in,  “This  doubt 
that  arises  consequent  on  the  death  of  a  man,  some  saying,  ‘It 
exists’,  and  others  saying,  ‘It  does  not  exist’ — I  would  know 
this  under  your  instruction.  Of  all  the  boons  this  one  is  the 
third  boon”  (Ka.  I.  i.  20).  And  the  question  about  the  supreme 
Self  is  contained  in,  “Tell  me  of  that  thing  which  you  see  as 
different  from  virtue,  different  from  vice,  different  from  these 
cause  and  effect,  and  different  from  the  past  and  future”  (Ka. 
I.  ii.  14).  In  the  answer  also,  Fire  is  spoken  of  in,  “Death  told 
him  of  the  Fire  that  is  the  source  of  the  world;  the  form  and 
number  of  bricks”  (Ka.  I.  i.  15);  the  individual  soul  is  spoken 
of  in  the  remote  passage,  “Well,  O  Gautama,  I  shall  tell  you  of 
this  secret,  eternal  Brahman,  and  also  how  the  soul  fares  after 
death.  Some  souls  enter  the  womb  for  acquiring  bodies,  and 
others  follow  the  motionless,  in  accordance  with  their  works 
and  in  conformity  with  their  knowledge”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  6-7);  and 
Brahman  is  spoken  of  elaborately  in  the  text  starting  with,  “The 
intelligent  Self  is  neither  bom  nor  does  It  die”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  18). 
But  there  is  no  such  question  about  Pradhana;  and  since  it  has 
not  been  asked  for,  it  has  no  need  to  be  presented. 

To  this  the  opponent  says :  Is  the  same  Self  that  is  inquired 
about  in  the  question,  “The  doubt  that  arises  consequent  on 
the  death  of  a  man,  some  saying,  ‘It  exists’,  others  saying,  ‘It 
does  not  exist’”  (Ka.  I.  i.  20),  again  alluded  to  in,  “Tell  me 
of  that  thing  which  you  see  as  different  from  virtue,  different 
from  vice”  etc.  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14),  or  is  a  fresh  question  raised  here 
that  is  different  from  the  earlier  one? 

What  are  you  driving  at? 

Should  you  say  that  the  earlier  question  itself  is  alluded  to, 
then  there  will  be  only  two  questions  relating  to  Fire  and  the 
Self,  the  two  questions  about  the  Self  having  coalesced.  Hence 


I.  iv.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  255 

it  cannot  be  said  that  only  three  questions  have  been  put.  If, 
however,  it  is  maintained  that  a  fresh  question  has  been  raised 
here,  then  just  as  there  is  no  harm  in  fancying  any  question 
outside  the  boons  granted,  so  also  there  can  be  no  harm  in 
thinking  that  Pradhana  is  presented  irrespective  of  any  relevant 
question. 

Vedantin:  With  regard  to  this  it  is  said:  We  do  not,  in  that 
sense,  imagine  here  (in  Ka.  I.  ii.  14)  any  question  outside  the 
boons  offered,  for  we  are  backed  by  the  way  the  topic  is  started. 
It  is  noticeable  that  the  course  of  the  whole  narration  in  the 
form  of  a  talk  between  Death  and  Naciketas,  as  presented  by 
the  Katha  Upani$ad,  has  for  its  starting  point  the  offer  of  the 
booqs.  Death  granted  three  boons  to  Naciketas  who  had  been 
dismissed  by  his  father.  Naciketas  on  his  part,  asked  for  his 
father’s  mental  composure  through  the  first  boon.  Through 
the  second  boon  he  prayed  for  the  knowledge  of  Fire.  Through 
the  third,  he  asked  for  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  thus:  “The 
doubt  that  arises  consequent  on  the  death  of  a  man”  etc.  (Ka. 
I.  i.  20).  That  this  is  the  third  boon  is  known  from  the  indic¬ 
ative  sign,  “Of  all  the  boons,  this  one  is  the  third”  (ibid.).  Now 
if  a  fresh  question  is  raised  in,  “ . . .  different  from  virtue”  etc. 
(Ka.  I.  ii.  14),  then  the  unity  of  purport  (or  consistency  of  the 
text)  will  be  marred  by  the  imagination  of  something  outside 
the  boons  offered. 

Opponent :  Since  the  subject-matter  of  the  question  is  dif¬ 
ferent,  the  question  itself  must  be  new.  The  earlier  question  was 
about  the  individual  soul,  for  therein  was  mentioned  a  doubt 
about  existence  and  non-existence  in  the  words,  “The  doubt  that 
arises  consequent  on  the  death  of  a  man”  etc.  Besides,  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  is  within  the  range  of  virtue  etc.,  so  that  it  cannot  be 
the  subject  of  the  question,  “ . . .  different  from  virtue”  etc.  But 
the  intelligent  Self  can  be  the  subject-matter  of  the  question, 
“ . . .  different  from  virtue”  etc.,  that  Self  being  beyond  virtue 
etc.  The  modes  of  the  questions  are  also  noticed  to  be  dissimilar; 
for  the  earlier  question  relates  to  existence  and  non-existence, 
whereas  the  latter  relates  to  something  beyond  virtue  etc.  Hence 
from  the  absence  of  a  recognition  of  identity,  it  follows  that  the 


256  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iv.  6 

questions  are  different,  and  that  it  is  not  a  fact  that  the  earlier 
subject-matter  is  reverted  to  in  the  latter. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  it  is  admitted  that  the  individual  soul  and 
the  intelligent  Self  are  one.  Had  the  individual  soul  been  dif¬ 
ferent  from  the  intelligent  Self,  then  the  question  could  have 
been  different  owing  to  a  difference  of  subject-matter.  But  the 
difference  is  non-existent  according  to  other  Upani$adic  texts, 
as  for  instance,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7).  And  here  also 
the  answer  to  the  question,  “ . . .  different  from  virtue”  etc.,  is 
“The  intelligent  Self  is  never  bom,  nor  does  It  die”  (Ka.  I.  ii. 
18),  which,  through  a  denial  of  birth  and  death,  reveals  the 
identity  of  the  embodied  soul  and  the  supreme  Lord;  and  this  is 
the  fact  that  is  sought  to  be  established.  A  denial  is  appropriate 
when  a  certain  possibility  is  under  discussion.  And  that  possi¬ 
bility  is  the  birth  and  death  that  can  occur  to  the  embodied 
soul  owing  to  its  association  with  the  body,  but  not  to  the 
supreme  Lord.  Similarly  the  text,  “Having  realized  that  great 
and  all-pervading  Self,  with  the  help  of  which  a  man  perceives 
the  objects  in  both  the  sleeping  and  waking  states,  a  wise  man 
does  not  grieve”  (Ka.  II.  i.  4),  shows  that  one  becomes  freed 
from  sorrow  by  contemplating  on  the  greatness  and  pervasive¬ 
ness^  ot  that  very  individual  soul  which  witnesses  the  states  of 
sleep  and  wakefulness;  and  there  it  refuses  to  show  that  the 
individual  soul  is  different  from  the  conscious  Self.  For  it  is  the 
conclusion  of  the  Upani$ads  that  sorrow  ends  after  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  conscious  Self.  Similarly,  a  little  later  it  is  said, 
“What  indeed  is  here  is  there;  what  is  there  is  here  likewise.  He 
who  sees  as  though  there  is  difference  here  goes  from  death  to 
death”  (Ka.  II.  i.  10),  which  repudiates  the  idea  of  difference 
between  the  individual  soul  and  the  conscious  Self.  Similarly, 
after  the  question  regarding  the  existence  or  non-existence  of 
the  individual  soul,  Death  goes  on  tempting  Naciketas  by  offer¬ 
ing  various  desirable  things,  as  stated  in  the  verses  commencing 
with,  “O  Naciketas,  ask  for  some  other  boon”  (Ka.  I.  i.  21).  But 
when  Naciketas  remains  unmoved  even  under  the  temptation. 
Death  shows  to  him  the  division  between  worldly  prosperity  and 
liberation  as  also  the  division  between  enlightenment  and  un¬ 
enlightenment.  After  that  he  praises  Naciketas  by  saying,  “I 


I.  iv.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  257 

consider  Naciketas  to  be  an  aspirant  for  knowledge,  since  the 
covetable  things,  multifarious  though  they  are,  did  not  tempt 
you”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  4).  Then  praising  his  question  also,  Death  says, 
“The  intelligent  man  gives  up  happiness  and  sorrow  by  develop¬ 
ing  concentration  of  mind  on  the  Self  and  thereby  meditating 
on  the  old  Deity  who  is  inscrutable,  lodged  inaccessibly,  located 
in  the  intellect,  and  seated  in  the  midst  of  (the  body  and  senses 
which  are  a  source  of  )  misery”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  12).  From  this  also 
k  becomes  obvious  that  what  is  sought  to  be  spoken  of  here- 
is  the  non-difference  of  the  individual  soul  and  the  conscious 
Self.  If  Naciketas  had  discarded  the  question  for  which  he 
earned  the  high  encomium  of  Death,  and  raised  another  ques¬ 
tion  just  after  that  appreciation,  then  all  that  praise  would 
have  been  misplaced.  Accordingly,  “ . . .  different  from  virtue” 
etc.  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14)  only  reiterates  the  question  asked  in, 
“The  doubt  that  arises  consequent  on  the  death  of  a  man”  (Ka. 
I.  i.  20).  As  for  the  assertion  that  the  modes  of  the  questions  are 
different,  that  creates  no  difficulty;  for  the  details  about  the 
earlier  question  are  asked.  The  existence  of  the  soul  in  dissocia¬ 
tion  from  the  body  was  inquired  into  earlier,  and  of  that  very 
soul  the  state  beyond  birth  and  death  is  inquired  into  later  on. 
For  as  long  as  ignorance  does  not  vanish,  so  long  there  can  be 
no  going  out  of  the  range  of  virtue  etc.  and  no  cessation  of  the 
individuality  of  the  soul.  When  this  ignorance  is  removed,  the 
individual  soul  is  revealed  to  be  nothing  but  the  conscious  Self 
in  the  text,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7).  The  thing  itself 
is  not  affected  in  any  way  by  the  existence,  continuance,  or  elimi¬ 
nation  of  ignorance.  For  instance,  somebody  mistaking  a  piece  of 
rope  lying  in  deep  darkness  to  be  a  snake  may  run  away  from 
it,  shaking  with  fear,  and  some  one  else  may  tell  him,  “Do  not 
be  afraid;  this  is  not  a  snake,  but  simply  a  piece  of  rope.”  Then 
on  hearing  this,  the  former  gives  up  the  fear  of  the  snake  as 
well  as  his  shaking  and  retreat.  But  neither  during  the  continu¬ 
ance  of  the  idea  of  the  snake,  nor  when  it  leaves,  is  the  thing 
itself  affected  in  any  way.  So  also  are  we  to  understand  here. 
From  this  it  follows  that  the  text,  “The  intelligent  Self  is  neither 
born,  nor  does  It  die”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  18),  and  the  succeeding  texts 
17 


258  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  6 

stand  as  an  answer  to  the  question  about  the  existence  and  non¬ 
existence  (of  the  soul).  But  the  aphorism  is  to  be  construed 
from  the  standpoint  of  a  fancied  difference  between  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  and  the  intelligent  Self;  for  though  the  question  is 
the  same,  still  the  earlier  portion  of  the  text  can  be  imagined  to 
be  concerned  with  the  individual  soul,  because  the  question 
about  the  Self  during  the  state  of  departure  from  the  body 
involves  a  doubt  regarding  merely  the  existence  of  the  soul 
distinct  from  the  body,  and  because  its  mundane  aspect  of  being 
the  agent  of  activity  etc.  still  persists  (in  the  questioner’s  mind). 
But  the  later  portion  of  the  text  relates  to  the  conscious  Self, 
since  in  it  are  described  non-association  with  virtue  etc.  From 
this  it  is  quite  justifiable  to  think  of  Fire,  the  individual  soul, 
and  the  supreme  Self  (as  the  subject-matters  of  the  questions). 
But  on  the  supposition  of  Pradhana,  we  can  find  no  offering  of 
boon,  no  question,  and  no  answer.  This  is  the  difference. 

IIV9II 

7.  And  like  mahat  (avyakta  does  not  signify  any  Samkhya 
category  ). 

The  word  mahat  is  used  by  the  Samkhyas  to  mean  Pradhana’s 
first  evolved  effect  (viz  intellect),  which  is  endowed  with  a 
predominance  of  the  quality  of  sattva  (light,  transparence,  pure 
intelligence,  etc.).  But  that  meaning  is  not  in  evidence  in  Vedic 
uses,  because  the  word  dtmd  (Self)  is  seen  to  be  used  (along 
with  it)  in  such  texts  as,  “The  mahdn  dtmd  (great  soul)  is  higher 
than  the  intellect”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  10);  and  also  because  of  such  texts 
as,  “Having  meditated  on  the  dtmd  as  mahdn  (great)  and  perva¬ 
sive,  the  wise  man  does  not  grieve”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  22)  ;5  “I  know  this 
mahdn  (great)  Puru$a  beyond  darkness”6  (Sv.  III.  8).  Just  as 
mahat  does  not  signify  the  pure  intellect  of  the  Samkhyas  (in 
Vedic  literature),  so  also  the  word  avyakta  cannot  mean  Pra- 
dhana  in  Vedic  uses.  For  this  reason  also  the  inferred  Pradhana 
has  no  Vedic  authority. 


•This  freedom  from  grief  does  not  fit  in  with  thoughts  on  mahat. 
°This  transcendence  of  ignorance  is  not  possible  for  mahat . 


I.  iv.8] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  2:  The  Bowl 


259 


ii^ii 


As  in  the  case  of  the  bowl  special  character¬ 

istics  not  having  been  stated. 

8.  (The  word  aja  does  not  refer  to  Pradhana),  because  special 
characteristics  have  not  been  stated  as  in  the  case  of  the  bowl. 

Opponent :  The  believer  in  Pradhana  makes  the  rejoinder  that 
Pradhana  is  not  un-Vedic. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  mantra  text:  “One  aja  (lit.  birthless  entity) 
while  enjoying  the  ajd  (feminine  of  aja),  lies  by  the  side  of  that 
aja  which  has  the  variegated  hues  of  red,  white,  and  black,  and 
which  gives  birth  to  many  creatures  akin  to  itself.  But  another 
aja  discards  her  after  enjoyment”  (Sv.  IV.  5).  In  this  mantra  the 
qualities  of  rajas  (activity),  sattva  (intelligence),  and  tamas 
(inertia)  are  indicated  by  the  words  “red,  white,  and  black”. 
The  red  is  rajas ,  since  it  attracts;  the  white  is  sattva ,  since  it  is 
of  the  nature  of  light;  and  the  black  is  tamas ,  for  it  hides.  The 
state  of  their  balance  (i.e.  Pradhana)  is  expressed  through  the 
qualities  of  the  constituents — red,  white,  and  black.  The  word 
aja  is  derived  in  the  sense  of  one  that  has  no  birth,  for  it  is 
declared,  “Primordial  Nature  is  changeless”  (Sa.  Ka.  3). 

Objection :  Does  not  the  word  aja  conventionally  mean  a 
she-goat? 

Opponent :  True,  but  that  conventional  meaning  cannot  be 
subscribed  to  here,  since  it  is  a  context  of  philosophy.  That 
Nature  does  produce  many  creatures,  endowed  with  the  three 
qualities  of  sattva ,  rajas ,  and  tamas.  “One  aja ”,  that  is  to  say,  a 
purusa  (conscious  soul),  while  enjoying  or  while  being  delighted 
by  that  Nature,  “lies  by  her  side”,  accepts  that  Nature  as  identi¬ 
cal  with  itself  through  ignorance,  and  transmigrates  by  becom¬ 
ing  deluded  by  ideas  of  “I  am  happy,  I  am  unhappy,  I  am 
unenlightened”  etc.,  owing  to  its  non-discrimination.  “Another 
aja ”,  again,  that  is  to  say,  another  purusa  whose  power  of  dis¬ 
crimination  has  been  aroused,  becomes  detached,  and  he  discards 


260  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAgYA  [I.  iv.  8 

this  Nature  after  having  enjoyed  her,  gives  her  up  when  she  has 
accomplished  her  task  of  furnishing  experience  and  liberation; 
that  is  to  say,  he  becomes  free.  Thus  the  postulation  of  Pradhana 
etc.  by  the  followers  of  Kapila  has  a  Vedic  basis  to  be  sure. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  It  is  not  possible 
to  find  out  a  Vedic  basis  for  the  Samkhya  theory  by  a  reliance 
on  this  mantra ;  for  this  mantra,  in  its  isolation  from  the  context, 
cannot  lend  support  to  any  theory.  Inasmuch  as  primordial 
Nature  ( ajd )  etc.  can  be  established  anywhere  through  some 
sort  of  manipulation,  there  is  no  special  reason  for  emphasizing 
the  fact  that  the  theory  of  the  Samkhyas  alone  is  presented  here. 
This  is  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  bowl.  To  explain:  As  in  the 
text,  “There  is  a  bowl  that  opens  out  at  the  bottom  and  bulges 
at  the  top”  (Bj%  II.  ii.  3),  the  bowl  cannot  be  independently  and 
definitely  identified  with  any  kind  of  bowl  by  name,  for  the 
fancying  of  an  opening  below  etc.  can  be  somehow  applied  to 
all  kinds  of  things,  similarly  here  also,  this  mantra ,  “one  aja f 
while  enjoying”  etc.  mentions  no  specific  characteristic.  And  so 
it  cannot  be  categorically  asserted  that  Pradhana  alone  is  meant 
by  the  word  ajd  in  this  mantra. 

Opponent :  But  in  that  text  (Br.  II.  ii.  3)  a  particular  type 
of  bowl  is  understood  from  the  complementary  portion:  “The 
‘bowl  that  opens  out  at  the  bottom  and  bulges  at  the  top*  is 
this  head  of  ours,  for  it  is  a  bowl  that  has  its  opening  below 
and  bulges  at  the  top”  (ibid.).  But  in  what  sense  is  this  ajd  to 
be  understood  here? 

Veddntin :  In  answer  to  this  we  say: 

^  eRT  115.11 

g  Certainly  (the  source  consists  of)  those 

counting  from  fire  for  <r*TT  so  some  read  (of  them). 

9.  The  ajd  certainly  consists  of  the  elements  counting  from 
fire ,  for  some  read  of  them  as  such . 

By  this  ajd  is  to  be  understood  the  material  source  of  the  four 
classes  of  beings.7  It  sprang  from  the  supreme  Lord,  and  it 

7  Bom  of  eggs,  moisture,  uterus,  and  earth. 


I.  iv.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  261 

consists  of  the  elements  counting  from  fire,  viz  fire,  water,  and 
food  (i.e.  earth).  The  word  tu  (lit.  but)  is  used  to  imply 
emphasis,  (the  meaning  being),  this  aja  is  to  be  understood  as 
consisting  of  the  three  elements,  and  not  as  constituted  by  the 
three  attributes  (of  sattva ,  rajas ,  and  tamos). 

Why  so? 

For  the  followers  of  a  certain  Vedic  recension  read  of  the 
origin  of  fire,  water,  and  food  from  the  supreme  Lord  and  then 
read  of  their  colours  as  red  etc.:  “That  red  colour  that  the 
(gross)  fire  has  is  the  colour  of  the  (unmixed  element)  light; 
that  which  is  the  white  colour  (in  the  gross  fire)  is  the  colour 
of  (unmixed)  water;  that  which  is  the  black  colour  (in  the 
gross  fire)  is  the  colour  of  (unmixed)  food”  (Ch.  VI.  iv.  1). 
Those  very  fire,  water,  and  food  are  found  identically  here  as 
well,  because  of  the  common  words  “red”  etc.,  and  because  the 
words  “red”  etc.  primarily  imply  particular  types  of  colour,  and 
only  figuratively  imply  the  constituents  of  Pradhina.  And  they 
consider  that  an  ambiguous  passage  should  be  understood  with 
the  help  of  something  unambiguous.  So  also  here  (in  the 
Svetasvatara  Upani$ad  we  read):  “The  teachers  of  Brahman 
say,  ‘Is  Brahman  the  cause  (of  the  universe)?’”  Making  the 
start  with  this,  it  is  said,  “They  (the  teachers  of  Brahman) 
entered  into  Brahman  through  the  Yoga  of  meditation,  saw  the 
hidden  power,  existing  identified  with  the  Deity  Himself  and 
remaining  hidden  (i.e.  superimposed  on  Brahman)  together  with 
its  (three)  constituents”  (I.  1-3).  Thus  it  is  the  power  of  the 
supreme  Lord  which  creates  this  universe  that  we  come  across 
here  in  the  very  beginning  of  the  text.  Towards  the  end  of  the 
topic  also  that  very  power  is  met  with  in  the  text,  “Know 
Maya  to  be  Nature  (material  cause),  and  the  master  of  Maya 
to  be  the  great  Lord”  (Sv.  IV.  10),  and  “He  who,  though  one, 
presides  over  every  source8  (i.e.  the  power  of  ignorance)”  (Sv. 
IV.  11).  Hence  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  the  mantra  about  the 
aja  presents  any  independent  Nature  (material  cause),  called 
Pradhana.  From  the  trend  of  the  context  it  is  held  by  us  that 

8  Maya,  though  one,  has  parts,  constituting  the  limiting  adjuncts  of 
individuals.  This  Maya  is  not  Pradhana,  for  Maya  has  only  one  ruler, 
God;  but  the  Samkhyas  believe  in  many  punkas  (souls). 


262  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iv.  9 

this  very  divine  power  in  which  names  and  forms  remain  undif¬ 
ferentiated  and  which  is  the  latent  form  of  names  and  forms, 
is  mentioned  by  this  mantra  (§v.  IV.  5)  as  well.  But  that  power 
is  spoken  of  as  having  a  triple  form,  just  because  its  products 
have  a  triple  form. 

Opponent :  How  again  from  the  three  characteristics  of  fire, 
water,  and  food  can  we  arrive  at  the  aja  (she-goat)  which  is 
different  in  form?  For  the  shape  of  the  aja  (she-goat)  is  not 
present  in  fire,  water,  and  food.  Again,  since  the  Upani§ad 
mentions  the  birth  of  fire,  water,  and  food,  the  word  aja  (in 
the  sense  of  birthless)  cannot  apply  to  them  just  because  of 
birthlessness. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  answer  is  being  given: 

^  And  ^q^T-^^rTd’  since  that  is  an  instruction  in  the  form 
of  an  imagery  as  in  the  case  of  honey  etc.,  arfarN’: 

there  is  no  contradiction. 

10.  And  since  this  is  an  instruction  in  the  form  of  an  imagery , 
just  as  in  the  case  of  honey  etc.,  therefore  there  is  no  incon¬ 
gruity . 

The  word  aja  is  not  used  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  form 
of  a  she-goat  (aja),  nor  is  it  used  in  the  derivative  sense  (of 
that  which  is  unborn). 

How  is  it  used  then? 

“This  is  an  instruction  in  the  form  of  an  imagery”;  the  anal¬ 
ogy  to  a  she-goat  is  taught  here  about  the  (material)  source  of 
all  things — moving  and  immobile — that  consists  of  fire,  water, 
and  food.  Thus  even  as  in  the  world,  there  may  perchance  be  a 
she-goat  (aja),  red,  white,  and  black  in  colour,  with  kids,  many 
in  number  and  of  similar  constitution  with  hers,  and  some  he- 
goat  (aja)  may  lie  by  her,  while  some  other  may  discard  her 
after  enjoyment,  similarly  this  source  of  all  elements  (i.e.  Maya), 
consisting  of  fire,  water,  and  food,  and  having  three  colours, 
gives  birth  to  many  products  that  are  similar  to  her.  She  is 
enjoyed  by  the  unenlightened  knower  of  the  body  (i.e.  the 


I.  iv.  1 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  263 

individual  soul)  and  discarded  by  the  enlightened  one.  But  it  is 
not  to  be  assumed  that  since  one  soul  lies  by  her,  while  another 
discards,  therefore  there  emerges  a  real  difference  among  the 
souls  as  is  upheld  by  the  others  (Samkhyas).  For  this  is  not  an 
attempt  at  establishing  any  difference  among  the  souls;  rather 
this  is  an  attempt  at  explaining  the  mechanism  of  bondage  and 
freedom.  This  process  of  bondage  and  freedom  is  explained  by 
taking  the  help  of  the  commonsense  difference  (among  souls). 
This  difference,  however,  is  a  creation  of  limiting  adjuncts;  and 
is  conjured  up  by  false  ignorance.  It  is  not  real  as  is  shown  in 
such  Upani$adic  texts  as:  “The  one  single  Deity  lies  hidden  in 
all  beings.  He  is  all-pervasive  and  the  inmost  soul  of  all”  (Sv. 
VI.  11).  This  is  analogous  to  honey  etc.  Just  as  the  sun,  which 
is  not  honey,  is  thought  of  as  honey  (Ch.  III.  i);  or  as  the  organ 
of  speech  which  is  not  a  cow,  is  fancied  to  be  a  cow  (Bjr.  V. 
viii);  or  as  heaven  and  other  things,  which  are  not  fire,  are 
imagined  to  be  fire  (Ch.  V.  iv-viii;  Bj\  VI.  ii.  9);  so  here  also, 
like  these  and  other  similar  instances,  something  (viz  Maya), 
that  is  not  a  she-goat,  is  thought  of  to  be  a  she-goat.  This  is 
the  idea.  Therefore  it  is  nothing  incongruous  to  apply  the  word 
she-goat  to  fire,  water,  and  food  (i.e.  earth). 

Topic  3:  Statement  of  Number 

cf  Not  arfq  even  on  the  strength  of  the  mention 

of  number,  rjHT-TTT^T^  because  the  entities  are  disparate  and 
arfa^ERT  there  is  an  excess. 

11.  Not  even  on  the  strength  of  the  mention  of  number  can 
Pradhana  have  Vedic  sanction ,  because  the  entities  are  disparate , 
and  they  involve  an  excess. 

Though  the  mantra ,  having  a  reference  to  the  she-goat,  has 
thus  been  disposed  of,  still  the  Sctthkhya  comes  forward  with 
another  mantra.  In  the  mantra,  “That  in  which  the  panca  panca - 
janah  (five  of  the  quintuplet)  and  space  are  placed,  that  very  Self 
I  regard  as  the  immortal  Brahman.  Having  known  (Brahman), 


264  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  [I.  iv.  1 1 

I  am  immortal”  (Bj-.  IV.  iv.  17),  we  hear  of  panca  paficajanah . 
In  this  phrase  one  number  five  is  heard  of  in  connection  with 
another  number  five;  for  the  word  five  is  used  twice.  So  these 
quintuplets  taken  five  times  make  up  twenty-five.  And  the 
number  of  things  that  can  be  enumerated  as  twenty-five  corre¬ 
sponds  exactly  to  the  number  of  the  categories  mentioned  by  the 
Samkhyas,  as  in,  “Primordial  Nature  is  the  undifferentiated 
(category);  seven,  counting  from  mahat ,  are  both  sources  (of 
others)  and  are  (themselves)  modifications  (of  Nature);  and 
sixteen  are  the  evolved  products.9  But  purusa  is  neither  a  source 
nor  a  modification  of  it”  ( Samkhya-Kiirika ,  3).  Since  the 
number  twenty-five,  known  from  the  Upani$ad,  stands  for 
the  twenty-five  categories,  therefore  Pradhana  and  the  rest  come 
to  have  Vedic  authority  again. 

Vedantin :  Therefore  we  say:  No  hope  of  Vedic  sanction  of 
Pradhana  and  the  rest  should  be  entertained  “even  from  the 
mention  of  number”. 

Why? 

Because  the  entities  are  disparate.  For  these  twenty-five 
(Samkhya)  categories  are  diverse  indeed;  they  do  not  have  five 
common  qualities  to  form  five  groups,  in  which  case  alone  one 
could  have  split  up  the  number  twenty-five  afresh  into  five 
divisions  of  five  each.  For  such  numerals  as  two  and  the  rest 
are  not  applied  to  divergent  things  that  do  not  display  some 
unifying  common  factor.  If,  however,  it  be  maintained  that 
(there  is  no  grouping  in  that  sense),  but  the  mere  number 
twenty-five  is  indicated  here  with  the  help  of  its  component 
numbers,  as  for  instance  a  drought  continuing  for  twelve  years  is 
described  thus:  “Indra  did  not  pour  rain  for  five  and  seven  years”; 
that  too  is  unjustifiable.  The  weakness  of  such  a  view  is  that  one 
has  to  resort  to  an  indirect  indication.  Moreover,  the  second  word 
panca  here  combines  with  jana  to  form  the  compound  word 
paficajanah,  which  is  known  to  be  a  single  word  from  its  way 

•Seven  modifications — mahat  (i.e.  intellect),  egoism,  and  five  subtle 
elements  (space,  air,  fire,  water,  earth);  they  are  both  modifications  and 
sources.  Mahat  evolves  from  Pradhana  and  evolves  into  egoism.  The 
subtle  elements  evolve  from  egoism  and  evolve  into  gross  elements.  The 
sixteen  evolved  products  are  the  five  gross  elements  and  the  eleven  organs. 


I.  iv.  11]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  265 

of  pronunciation  according  to  Bh&fika  rules  (about  pronun¬ 
ciation)  with  (or  without)  accent  on  the  last  vowel  alone. 
Besides,  from  another  use  also,  “O  oblation,  I  take  you  up  in 
honour  of  the  panca.  pancajanas  (five  deities),  (so  that  this 
body  of  mine  which  is  like  an  instrument  for  the  gods  and 
which  is  the  basis  of  enjoyment  here  and  hereafter  may  remain 
unimpaired)”  (Tai.  Sa.  I.  vi.  1.2),  we  know  it  to  be  a  single 
word  uttered  in  the  same  breath  and  having  a  single  case-ending. 
Besides,  since  one  five  forms  a  compound  word  (with  jam), 
there  can  be  no  such  repetition  of  five  (as  “five  fives”).10 
Accordingly,  we  cannot  have  two  fives  (or  ten).  Nor  can  be 
one  number  five  be  joined  to  another  number  five,  for  an 
attributive  word  cannot  take  another  adjective.11 

Opponent :  May  it  not  be  that  the  word  janah  (entities), 
with  the  number  five  already  construed  with  it,  is  qualified 
again  by  the  number  five,  so  that  janah  can  appear  as  twenty- 
five  in  number,  just  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  panca  panpapUlyah, 
where  twenty-five  pieces  of  grass  are  understood.12 

Vedantin  :  We  say,  no.  The  term  pancaptili ,  being  an  instance 
of  a  compound  term  signifying  a  group  (i.e.  a  bundle  of  five 
pieces  of  grass),  the  curiosity  arises  about  a  qualifying  numeral: 
“How  many  bundles?”  And  hence  we  get  a  phrase,  “five  of  the 
bundles  of  five  grass  pieces  (each)”.  But  here,  in  the  very  use, 
pancajanah  (five  entities),  (which  is  not  a  samahara-dvigu ),18 
the  qualifying  numeral  (five)  being  already  present,  no  curiosity 


10  the  panca  of  pancajanah  cannot  be  detached  to  be  construed  separately 
with  pane  a  (five)  to  make  twenty-five. 

11  Even  if  pancajanah  be  not  a  compound  word,  so  that  its  panca  can 
be  treated  separately,  still  one  panca  cannot  qualify  the  other  panca, 
since  both  are  numerals  qualifying  janah.  Even  if  the  two  fives  are 
construed  with  janah  we  get  only  ten  janah. 

“  Pancajanah  is  not  a  compound.  But  five  is  not  connected  with  another 
five  directly,  nor  are  both  fives  construed  separately  with  janah .  One  five 
is  first  joined  to  janah ,  and  this  phrase  is  then  qualified  by  another  five, 
thus  making  25  janah . 

“In  pancaptili  we  have  the  samahara-dvigu  compound  (with  a  numeral 
in  the  first  part);  and  so  i  is  added  at  the  end  (Pa.  Su.  II.  i.  52,  IV.  i.  21). 
But  in  pancajanah  there  is  no  i  at  the  end,  which  fact  clearly  shows  that 
it  is  not  a  dvigu  compound. 


266  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.  iv.  1 1 

about  an y  numerical  determination  arises;  and  hence  panca 
pancajanah  cannot  be  a  numerical  determination.  If  panca  be 
still  a  numeral  adjective,  (the  first)  five  will  qualify  the  second 
five  (and  not  jandh ).14  The  consequent  defect  (that  one  adjec¬ 
tive  cannot  qualify  another)  has  already  been  pointed  out. 

“And  since  they  involve  an  excess”,  the  twenty-five  categories 
are  not  meant;  for  the  number  twenty- five  is  exceeded  by  the 
Self  and  space  (which  would  make  the  number  twenty-seven). 
Of  these  two,  the  Self  is  here  mentioned  as  the  receptacle  hold¬ 
ing  others;  for  the  entity  indicated  by  the  locative  case  in  yasmin 
(in  which)  is  referred  back  as  the  Self  in,  “that  very  Self  I 
regard”15  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  17).  The  Self  is  the  conscious  Puru$a 
(all-pervasive  entity).  Since  that  Puru?a  is  already  included  (by 
the  Samkhyas)  among  the  twenty-five  (categories),  that  Puru$a 
cannot  be  both  the  container  and  thing  contained.  Again,  if  the 
Self  be  taken  in  some  other  sense,  the  number  of  categories  will 
still  be  exceeded.  This  militates  against  the  Samkhya  theory. 
Similarly,  it  is  not  proper  to  enumerate  space  separately  by  say¬ 
ing,  “and  space  is  placed”,  it  having  been  already  included  in 
the  twenty-five  (categories).  If  some  other  meaning  be  given  to 
it,  the  accruing  defect  has  been  pointed  out  already.  Why,  again, 
from  hearing  the  mere  number  twenty-five  should  one  jump  to 
the  twenty-five  categories  that  are  not  talked  of?  For  the  word 
jana  does  not  conventionally  mean  a  (Samkhya)  category,  and 
the  number  can  be  justified  in  some  other  sense  as  well. 

Opponent :  How  would  you  then  explain,  panca  pancajanah ? 

The  answer  is:  According  to  the  special  rule  of  grammar, 
“Words  denoting  direction  (or  quarter)  and  number  are  com¬ 
bined  with  nouns  to  form  terminologies”16  (Pa.  Su.  II.  i.  50), 
the  word  panca  is  combined  with  jana  to  give  rise  to  a  technical 
term.  So  some  beings,  called  pancajanah  are  meant  in  a  conven¬ 
tional  sense,  and  not  the  categories  of  the  Samkhyas.  When  the 

14  For  as  shown,  jandh  has  its  own  numeral  adjective. 

““That  in  which  the  five  of  the  quintuplet  and  space  are  placed,  that 
very  Self  I  regard  as  the  immortal  Brahman.” 

“ 'Dakfinagni  (lit.  the  south-fire,  i.e.  the  fire  having  that  name), 
Saptatfis  (i.e.  a  group  of  seven  well-known  sages,  who  are  also  conceived 
of  as  the  seven  stars  of  the  Great  Bear). 


I.  iv.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  267 

curiosity  arises  to  know  how  many  they  are,  the  word  five  is 
added  again  to  it.  There  are  some  entities  (conventionally) 
called  a  quintuplet  (pancajanah) ,  and  they  are  five  in  number. 
This  is  just  as  one  might  say,  “The  saptarsis 17  (seven-r$is)  are 
seven”. 

Who,  again,  constitute  that  quintuplet? 

That  is  being  answered: 

STPJTmt  ll^ll 

The  vital  force  and  the  rest  from  the 

complementary  passage. 

12.  The  vital  force  and  the  rest  ( are  the  pancajanah ),  (as  is 
known)  from  the  comple?nentary  passage. 

In  the  verse,  following  “That  in  which  five  of  the  quintu¬ 
plet”  etc.  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  17),  the  five  entities — vital  force  and  the 
rest — are  enumerated  for  the  sake  of  ascertaining  the  nature  of 
Brahman:  “Those  who  have  known  the  Vital  Force  of  the  vital 
force,  the  Eye  of  the  eye,  the  Ear  of  the  ear,  the  Food  of  food 
and  the  Mind  of  the  mind,  (have  realized  the  ancient,  primordial 
Brahman)”  (Bf.  madhyandina  recension  IV.  iv.  21).  On  account 
of  proximity,  the  ones  enumerated  in  the  complementary  passage 
are  meant  by  the  quintuplet. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  the  word  jana  (lit.  person)  be 
used  with  regard  to  the  vital  force  and  the  rest? 

Vedantin :  How  can  it  either  be  used  with  regard  to  the 
Samkhya  categories?  Since  either  of  the  two  interpretations 
involves  a  transgression  of  common  usage,  the  vital  force  etc. 
must  be  accepted  on  the  strength  of  the  complementary  passage. 
And  the  vital  force  etc.  become  fit  to  be  referred  to  by  the  word 
jana  (person)  by  virtue  of  their  association  with  a  synonym  of 
jana  (viz  purusa).  Moreover,  the  word  puru$a ,  which  is  a 
synonym  of  jam ,  is  used  to  denote  the  vital  force  etc.  in,  “These 
are  in  fact  the  five  persons  of  Brahman  ( Brahmapuru$dh )”  (Ch. 

17  Which  does  not  mean  seven  times  seven,  or  forty-nine  rps,  but 
simply  seven  rps  constituting  the  group  called  Saptarsis . 


268  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  12 

III.  xiii.  6).  There  is  also  the  brdhmana  text,  “The  vital  force  is 
the  father,  the  vital  force  is  the  mother”  (Ch.  VII.  xv.  1). 
Besides,  on  the  strength  of  the  formation  of  the  compound,  the 
whole  phrase  can  well  be  a  conventional  term  without  any 
contradiction. 

Opponent :  How  can  a  conventional  sense  be  accepted  in  the 
absence  of  earlier  usage? 

Veddntin :  The  answer  is:  It  can  be  so  as  in  the  case  of  the 
words  udbhid  etc.  When  a  word  with  an  unfamiliar  import  is 
used  in  the  proximity  of  words  of  familiar  meaning,  its  meaning 
is  determined  by  that  association  itself,  as  in,  “One  (desiring 
animals)  should  endeavour  to  acquire  the  desired  result  by 
sacrificing  ‘through  udbhid?1*”,  “He  splits  the  sacrificial  stake1®”, 
“He  prepares  an  altar20”.  Similarly,  this  word  pancajandh ,  being 
understood  on  the  strength  of  the  formation  of  the  compound 
to  stand  for  the  name  of  something,  raises  an  inquiry  about  the 
thing  it  names,  and  thereby  it  points  to  the  vital  force  etc. 
occurring  in  the  complementary  passage. 

Some  explain  that  the  pancajanas  are  the  gods,  manes,  Gan* 
dharvas ,  devils,  and  demons,  while  others  accept  the  four  castes 
with  the  Nifddas  (i.e.  Brahmaoa’s  sons  by  Sudra  wives)  as  the 
fifth.  In  some  places,  again,  the  word  pancajandh  is  found  in 
the  sense  of  creatures,  as  in,  “(It  is  but  proper)  that  assuming 
the  form  of  a  human  being,  born  of  the  pancajandh  (i.e.  crea¬ 
tures),  He  created  calls  for  the  invocation  of  Indra”  (R.  V. 
VIII.  liii.  7).  No  incongruity  arises  even  if  we  accept  any  of 
these  senses.  But  when  the  teacher  Vyasa  says,  ‘*The  vital  force 
and  the  rest  are  the  pancajandh  as  is  known  from  the  comple¬ 
mentary  passage”,  he  wants  to  show  that  the  twenty-five 
categories  are  not  to  be  understood  here. 

“Though  udbhid  may  mean  other  things  in  other  contexts,  the  asso¬ 
ciation,  obvious  in  “by  sacrificing”,  points  out  that  it  is  the  name  of  the 
sacrifice  itself. 

“From  association  with  “splitting”,  the  word  “stake”  here  means  some 
timber  fit  to  be  shaped  into  a  stake. 

"“Altar”  here  means  not  the  finished  altar,  but  some  sacrificial  place 
yet  to  be  sanctified,  which  meaning  follows  from  its  association  with  the 
word  “prepares”. 


I.  iv.  13]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  269 

Opponent :  The  vital  farce  and  the  rest  can  be  the  pancajandh 
for  the  followers  of  the  Madhyandina  recension  who  read  of 
food  along  with  the  vital  force  etc.  But  how  will  the  followers 
of  the  Kaova  recension  get  their  pancajandh ,  who  do  not  read 
of  food  in  their  enumeration  of  the  vital  force  etc.? 

Hence  the  answer  is  being  given  (by  the  Vedantin): 

linn 

(The  number  is  filled  up)  by  light  for  some 

when  food  is  not  present. 

13.  For  the  followers  of  some  recension ,  the  number  five  has 
to  be  made  up  with  light  in  the  absence  of  food. 

Although  the  followers  of  the  Kagva  recension  miss  food, 
their  quintuplet  is  made  up  of  light  (fire),  for  in  the  verse, 
“Upon  that  immortal  Light  of  all  lights  the  gods  meditate  as 
longevity”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  16),  which  precedes  the  verse,  “That  in 
which  the  five  pancajandh ”  etc.,  they  read  of  light  for  the  very 
purpose  of  determining  the  nature  of  Brahman. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  this  light,  read  of  equally  in  both 
the  recensions,  be  accepted  for  some  but  not  for  others  as  having 
been  referred  to  by  the  number  five,  occurring  in  the  same 
verse? 

The  answer  (of  the  Veddntin)  is  being  given  by  saying  that 
this  is  owing  to  a  difference  in  necessity.  In  the  case  of  the 
Madhyandinas,  the  quintuplet  consists  of  the  vital  force  and  the 
rest.  They  being  all  present  in  the  same  verse,  there  is  no  need 
to  turn  to  light  occurring  in  another  verse.  But  since  in  the 
case  of  the  Kaovas,  these  are  not  so  present,  the  need  arises  for 
taking  the  help  of  light.  And  although  the  mantra  about  the 
light  is  the  same,  light  is  accepted  or  not  according  to  the  dif¬ 
ference  of  need.  This  is  just  like  the  acceptance  or  non-accep¬ 
tance  of  (the  sacrificial  vessel  called)  §o<Jasin,  on  the  basis  of  a 
difference  of  injunction,  although  the  Atiratra  sacrifice  (in 
which  the  vessel  is  used)  is  the  same.21 

“The  opponent  may  say  that  in  Atiratra  we  are  concerned  with  action, 
where  alternatives  are  admissible,  but  not  so  when  the  knowledge  of 


270  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iv.13 

Thus,  in  any  case,  there  is  no  familiar  mention  (i.e.  sanction) 
of  Pradhana  in  the  Upani$ads.  As  for  familiarity  through  Smrti 
and  reasoning,  that  will  be  repudiated  in  future. 

Topic  4:  Causality 


^  And  as  the  cause  m  resPect  °f  space 

and  the  rest,  It  having  been  spoken  of  in  all  the 

Upani$ads  as  in  any  one. 

14.  (Brahman  is  presented  by  all  the  Upanisads);  f or  as  the 
cause  of  space  and  the  rest ,  Brahman  is  spoken  of  in  all  the 
Upanisads  just  as  It  is  in  any  one  of  the?n. 

Opponent :  The  characteristics  of  Brahman  have  been  shown 
(B.  S.  I.  i.  2);  and  the  uniformity  of  knowledge  of  Brahman 
in  all  the  Upani$ads  has  also  been  proved  (I.  i.  10).  Moreover, 
it  has  been  established  that  Pradhana  is  not  mentioned  by  the 
Upani$ads  (I.  iv.  1).  Now  in  that  connection  another  objection 
is  being  raised.  It  cannot  be  proved  either  that  Brahman  is  the 
cause  of  the  universe  or  that  the  texts  of  the  Upani$ads  lead  to 
an  identical  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

Why? 

On  account  of  the  divergence  that  comes  to  view.  The  crea¬ 
tion  in  every  Upani$ad  seems  to  be  divergent,  owing  to  the 
difference  in  the  order  etc.  (of  creation).  For  instance,  at  one 
place  creation  is  described  as  starting  with  space:  “From  the 
Self  emerged  space”  (Tai.  II.  i).  At  some  place  it  starts  with 
light:  “That  Existence  (Brahman)  created  light”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3). 
At  another  place,  creation  has  the  vital  force  at  its  head:  “He 
created  the  vital  force;  and  from  the  vital  force  He  created 
faith”  (Pr.  VI.  4).  At  still  another  place  the  emergence  of  the 
worlds  is  recounted  irrespective  of  any  order:  “He  created  these 
worlds — heaven,  interspace,  the  earth,  the  nether  world”  (Ai.  I. 

things  is  concerned.  The  answer  will  be  that  here  also  we  are  concerned 
with  the  act  of  meditation,  in  which  Brahman  becomes  an  object,  thought 
of  as  the  abode  of  five  things,  viz  Prana  etc.  and  either  food  or  light. 


I.  iv.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  271 

i.  2).  Similarly  at  some  places  we  read  of  creation  starting  from 
non-existence.  “In  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  non-existence. 
From  that  sprang  existence”  (Tai.  II.  vii),  and  “This  was  but  non¬ 
existence  in  the  beginning.  That  became  existence.  That  became 
ready  to  be  manifest”22  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1).  At  some  places  the 
theory  of  creation  from  nothing  is  refuted,  and  creation  from 
existence  is  asserted.  For  instance,  starting  with,  “With  regard 
to  that  some  say  that  the  universe  was  non-existence  before 
creation”,  it  is  stated,  “  ‘But  how  can  this  be  so,  O  amiable  one?’ 
he  said,  ‘How  can  existence  emerge  out  of  non-existence?  This 
was  but  existence,  to  be  sure,  in  the  beginning’  ”  (Ch.  VI.  ii. 
1-2).  The  evolution  of  the  universe  is  stated  at  some  places  to  be 
spontaneous:  “In  the  beginning  this  was  undifferentiated.  That 
became  differentiated  into  name  and  form  only”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  7). 
Thus  since  there  are  many  such  opposing  ideas,  and  since  a 
thing  in  itself  is  not  paradoxical,  it  is  not  proper  to  hold  that  the 
Upani$ads  are  concerned  with  any  definite  ascertainment  of  the 
cause  of  the  universe.  But  in  consonance  with  the  theory,  well 
recognized  by  the  Smrtis  and  reasoning,  it  is  proper  to  accept 
some  other  thing  as  the  cause. 

Vedantin :  Under  such  circumstances  we  say:  Although  the 
Upani$ads  are  individually  at  variance  in  the  matter  of  the  order 
of  creation  etc.  of  space  and  other  things,  they  have  no  dif¬ 
ference  as  regards  the  Creator. 

How? 

Because  all  the  other  Upani$ads  declare  just  what  any  one  of 
them  does.  In  the  very  same  way  that  the  omniscient,  omnip¬ 
otent,  omnipresent,  the  One  without  a  second  is  declared  in 
any  one  of  the  Upani§ads  as  the  cause,  so  in  that  very  way  is 
that  One  declared  in  the  other  Upani$ads.  Take  for  instance  the 
text:  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”  (Tai.  II.  i).  By 


28  The  Vedantic  interpretation  of  these  two  texts  are:  (1)  This  universe 
of  name  and  form  did  not  exist  as  such  before  its  manifestation;  it 
remained  in  a  causal  state  without  the  differentiation  of  name  and  form. 
From  that  state  emerged  the  gross  universe  as  we  see  it.  (2)  The  universe 
remained  identified  with  Brahman  before  creation.  In  that  causal  state 
came  a  stir,  as  it  were;  and  then  from  that  emerged  a  sprout,  as  it  were, 
the  very  first  subtle  state  of  creation. 


272  BRAHMA-  SOTRA-BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  14 

the  use  of  the  term  knowledge  in  this  text  and  by  speaking  of 
“wishing”  by  It  in  a  subsequent  passage  (Tai.  II.  vi),  Brahman 
is  ascertained  as  Consciousness;  and  God  is  spoken  of  as  the 
cause  by  virtue  of#not  being  dependent  on  others  (ibid.).  By 
using  the  word  Self  with  regard  to  Him  subsequently,  and  by 
placing  (The  Self)  successively  inner  and  inner  in  a  series  of 
sheaths,  counting  from  this  body,  He  is  shown  to  be  the  inmost 
Self  of  all  (Tai.  II.  ii-v).  By  teaching  how  the  Self  became 
many,  in  the  text,  “He  wished,  let  me  be  many,  let  me  be 
born”  (Tai.  II.  vi),  it  is  stated  that  the  mutable,  created  things 
are  non-different  from  the  Creator.  Similarly  by  declaring  the 
creation  of  the  entire  universe  in  the  text,  “He  created  all  this 
that  exists”  (Tai.  II.  vi),  the  Upani$ad  asserts  that  a  single 
Creator  without  a  second  existed  before  creation.  The  character¬ 
istics  under  which  Brahman  is  known  here  as  the  cause,  are 
exactly  the  same  as  those  under  which  It  is  known  in  other 
Upani§ads  as  well:  “In  the  beginning,  O  amiable  one,  all  this 
was  but  Existence  (Brahman)— one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI. 
ii.  1);  “He  saw  (or  deliberated),  ‘I  shall  become  many,  I  shall 
be  born’.  He  created  light”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3).  Similarly,  “In  the 
beginning,  all  this  was  but  the  Self — one  without  a  second. 
Nothing  else  winked.  He  saw  (or  deliberated),  ‘Let  me  create 
the  worlds’  ”  (Ai.  I.  i.  1).  In  this  way  (there  is  no  disagreement 
about  the  creator)  since  the  texts  of  this  kind,  which  ascertain 
the  nature  of  the  cause,  are  not  at  variance  in  any  one  of  the 
Upani$ads.  But  difference  is  noticed  in  the  case  of  the  products 
— for  instance,  sometimes  creation  starts  with  space,  sometimes 
with  light,  and  so  on.  But  just  because  there  is  a  difference  as 
regards  the  products,  it  cannot  be  asserted  that  Brahman  is  not 
the  intended  purport  of  all  the  Upani$ads  even  though  It  is 
known  as  the  cause  from  all  of  them  without  any  doubt.  For 
such  an  assertion  will  lead  to  unwarranted  conclusions.23  The 
teacher  (Vyasa)  will  reconcile  the  variations,  so  far  as  the  pro¬ 
ducts  are  concerned,  under  the  aphorisms  starting  with,  “Space  is 
not  created,  as  it  is  not  so  stated  in  the  Upani$ads”  (II.  iii.  1).  Or 

"The  opponent  argues:  “The  cause  must  be  doubtful,  since  the  effects 
are  so.”  The  Vedanttn  can  say:  “Dreams  differ  and  they  are  false;  should 
then  the  dreamer  also  be  different  and  false?” 


I.  iv.  1 5  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  273 

divergences  may  well  be  there  in  the  case  of  the  effects,  for  they 
are  not  the  things  sought  to  be  taught.  Not  that  all  these  forms 
of  manifestation,  that  creation  is,  are  sought  to  be  propounded 
(by  the  Upani$ads);  for  no  human  goal  is  seen  or  heard  of  in 
the  Upani$ads  as  remaining  linked  up  with  them:  nor  can  this 
be  imagined  to  be  so,  for  in  those  respective  places,  they  are 
seen  to  combine  with  the  texts  about  Brahman  to  convey  a 
single  unified  idea.  This  is  what  the  Upani$ad  also  shows:  “O 
amiable  one,  with  the  help  of  this  sprout  that  food  is,  search  out 
its  root  that  is  water.  With  the  help  of  this  sprout  that  water 
is,  O  amiable  one,  search  out  the  root  that  fire  is.  With  the  help 
of  this  sprout  that  fire  is,  O  amiable  one,  search  out  the  root 
that  Existence  is”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  4).  Besides,  we  can  understand 
that  when  the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  the  forms  of  manifestation 
etc.  in  extenso,  the  intention  is  to  declare  the  non-difference  of 
the  effects  from  the  cause  with  the  help  of  such  illustrations  as 
clay  (Ch.  VI.  i.  4-6).  And  this  is  what  people  versed  in  the 
Vedantic  tradition  say:  “The  creation  that  is  taught  divergently 
with  the  help  of  clay,  iron,  sparks,  etc.  is  only  a  means  for 
inculcating  the  knowledge  of  Brahman;  but  there  is  no  diversity 
whatsoever”  (Ma.  Ka.  III.  15).  But  the  result  associated  with 
the  realization  of  Brahman  is  heard  of  in,  “The  knower  of 
Brahman  attains  the  supreme  (Brahman)”  (Tai.  II.  i),  “The 
knower  of  the  Self  transcends  sorrow”  (Ch.  VII.  i.  3),  and 
“Knowing  Him  alone  one  goes  beyond  death”  (Sv.  III.  8).  And 
this  result  is  a  matter  of  direct  experience,  for  the  transmigra- 
tory  selfhood  ceases  on  the  attainment  of  the  transcendental 
Selfhood  as  a  result  of  the  instruction,  “That  thou  art”24  (Ch. 
VI.  viii.  7). 

The  divergence  in  the  case  of  the  cause  that  was  pointed  out 
by  quoting,  “In  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  non-existence” 
(Tai.  II.  vii)  etc.,  has  to  be  reconciled.  As  to  that  it  is  said: 

n^ll 

IS.  (Non-existence  does  not  mean  void),  because  of  its  allu¬ 
sion  (to  Brahman). 

“This  must  be  a  fact  realizable  by  the  enlightened  ones,  for  this  is 
18 


274  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.iv.15 

In  the  text,  “In  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  non-existence”, 
non-existence,  conceived  of  as  void,  is  not  presented  as  the  cause; 
for  the  theory  of  non-existence  is  repudiated  in  the  verse:  “If 
any  one  knows  Brahman  as  non-existence,  he  himself  becomes 
non-existent.  If  any  one  knows  that  Brahman  does  exist,  then 
they  consider  him  as  existing  by  virtue  of  that  knowledge”  (Tai. 

II.  vi.  1).  And  then  this  Brahman,  which  is  Existence,  is  ascer¬ 
tained  as  the  indwelling  Self  with  the  help  of  a  succession  of 
sheaths  counting  from  that  made  of  food.  Again,  after  referring 
to  that  Brahman  under. consideration  in  the  text,  “He  wished” 
(Tai.  II.  vi.  1),  it  is  stated  that  creation  in  all  its  ramifications 
stemmed  out  of  Brahman,  and  the  conclusion  is  made  with, 
“They  call  that  Brahman  Truth”  (ibid.).  Lastly,  by  saying, 
“Pertaining  to  this,  there  occurs  this  verse,”  (ibid.),  the  verse, 
“In  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  non-existence”  etc.  (Tai.  II. 
vii.  1),  is  quoted  in  connection  with  that  very  subject-matter 
that  is  being  discussed.  If  something,  non-existent  in  the  sense 
of  a  void,  be  the  purport  of  this  (latter)  verse,  then  the  whole 
text  will  become  incoherent  as  involving  the  citation  of  some¬ 
thing  irrelevant  to  what  is  sought  to  be  referred  to.  Therefore 
it  follows  that  because  the  word  “existing”  is  used  in  common 
parlance  to  imply  things  manifested  through  names  and  forms, 
therefore  Brahman  which  surely  existed  before  creation  is  men¬ 
tioned  here  as  though  non-existent  before  creation  in  a  secon¬ 
dary  sense  owing  to  this  absence  of  manifestation.  This  is  how 
the  text,  “In  the  beginning  this  was  but  non-existence”  (Ch. 

III.  xix.  1)  has  also  to  be  construed,  for  the  same  is  alluded  to 
later  on  with  the  words,  “That  was  Existence”  (ibid.).  Had 
absolute  void  been  asserted,  what  would  have  been  referred  to 
later  on  by  saying,  “That  was  Existence”?  And  even  in  the 
text,  “With  regard  to  that  some  say  that  this  universe  was 
but  non-existence  before  creation”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  the  view  of 
“some”  people  is  not  presented  as  having  the  sanction  of  some 
other  Upani$ad;  for  unlike  action,  an  object  is  not  paradoxical. 
Accordingly,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  theory  of  non¬ 


supported  by  the  Upanisadic  texts,  and  the  result  of  this  realization  is 
confirmed  by  them. 


I.  iv.  15] 


BRAHMA  -  SOI  RA  -  BHA§YA 


275 


existence,  fancied  by  the  people  of  dull  intellect,  is  raised  and 
repudiated  with  a  view  to  strengthening  the  idea  of  Existence, 
accepted  by  the  Upani$ads.  Even  in  the  text,  “This  universe  was 
then  undifferentiated  (Bj*.  I.  iv.  7),  the  differentiation  (or  evolu¬ 
tion)  of  the  universe  is  not  spoken  of  as  proceeding  without  an 
ordainer;  for  in  the  text,  “He  (the  Self)  has  entered  into  these 
bodies  up  to  the  tips  of  the  nails”  (ibid.),  the  ordainer  is  alluded 
to  as  having  entered  into  the  differentiated  products.  If  the 
differentiation  be  understood  as  having  taken  place  without  an 
ordainer,  who  would  have  been  alluded  to  as  having  entered 
into  the  products  by  the  pronoun  “He”,  occurring  later  on,  which 
can  advert  only  to  something  already  under  consideration?  And 
this  act  of  entry  into  the  body  is  heard  of  (in  the  Upani§ad) 
about  the  sentient  Self;  for  in  the  text,  “ . . .  when  It  sees,  It 
is  called  the  eye;  when  It  hears,  the  ear;  and  when  It  thinks,  the 
mind”  (ibid.),  the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  the  consciousness  of  the 
entity  that  has  entered.  Besides,  it  can  be  understood  that  at  the 
time  of  the  first  creation,  the  universe  required  some  ordainer 
for  its  differentiation  into  names  and  forms,  just  as  much  as 
even  today  it  has  somebody  to  guide  it  when  differentiating  into 
names. and  forms  (as  pot,  cloth,  etc.).  For  any  fancy  that  does 
not  agree  with  observation  is  illogical.  Moreover,  another  text, 
“Let  me  manifest  name  and  form  by  Myself  entering  this  as 
this  individual  soul”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2),  shows  that  the  universe 
differentiated  under  some  guidance.  And  although  God  was 
there  as  the  creator,  still  the  use  of  the  object  (universe)  as  the 
subject  of  the  (intransitive)  verb  “differentiated”  (in  “it 
differentiated  into  name  and  form  only” — Bf.  I.  iv.  7),  is  to  be 
understood  as  pointing  to  the  ease  and  facility  in  the  act  of 
differentiation,  even  as  one  might  say,  “The  field  is  harvesting 
well”,  it  being  possible  for  the  crop  to  be  harvested  well  only 
if  there  be  some  peasant  to  harvest.  Or  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  (it  is  a  transitive)  verb  used  in  the  passive  voice  with  rela¬ 
tion  to  some  subject  called  up  to  mind  by  the  trend  of  the 
topic,  as  in  “The  village  is  being  reached” 


276 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  5:  Balaki 


[I.  iv.  16 


16.  Because  (the  word  “work”  is)  indicative  of  the  universe , 
(He  of  whom  this  is  the  work  must  be  Brahman). 

Doubt :  In  the  course  of  the  conversation  between  Balaki  and 
Ajatasatru  in  the  Kau$7takl  Upani§ad,  it  is  heard,  “He  indeed  is 
to  be  known,  O  Balaki,  who  is  in  fact  the  creator  (or  master)  of 
these  purusas  (beings),  or  rather  of  whom  this  is  surely  the  work 
(IV.  19).  With  regard  to  this,  the  doubt  arises:  Is  it  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  that  is  taught  to  be  known,  or  the  chief  vital  force,  or 
the  supreme  Self?  What  should  be  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn? 

Opponent :  It  must  be  the  vital  force. 

Why? 

Because  the  Upani$adic  text  is:  “He  of  whom  this  is  surely 
the  work”.  For  work,  consisting  of  movement,  is  dependent  on 
the  vital  force;  the  vital  force  is  met  with  in  the  complementary 
part  of  the  topic:  “Then  it  becomes  unified  in  Prana  itself’ 
(Kau.  IV.  20);  and  the  term  Prana  is  familiarly  used  for  the  chief 
vital  force.  Moreover,  the  vital  force  is  also  the  master  of  the 
persons  (purusas)  referred  to  by  Balaki  in  the  earlier  portion 
of  the  sentences:  “The  being  in  the  sun”  (Kau.  IV.  3),  “The 
being  in  the  moon”  (Kau.  IV.  4),  and  so  on.  For  the  deities  of 
the  sun  etc.  are  merely  different  aspects  of  the  vital  force  as  is 
well  known  from  another  Upani$ad,  “  ‘Which  is  the  one  god?’ 
‘The  vital  force;  the  vital  force  is  Brahman  which  is  called 
Tyat  (That)’  ”  (Bf.  III.  ix.  9). 

Or  it  may  be  the  individual  being  that  is  taught  here  as  the 
entity  to  be  known;  for  his  activities,  too,  constituting  virtue 
and  vice,  are  fit  to  be  mentioned  in  such  words  as,  “Of  whom 
this  is  the  work”  (Kau.  IV.  19).  He,  too,  as  being  the  experi- 
encer,  can  justifiably  be  the  master  of  all  these  purusas  who 
serve  as  the  things  of  his  experience.  And  in  the  complementary 
text  also  we  come  across  a  sign  indicative  of  the  individual  being; 
for  it  is  because  of  this  fact  that,  when  Balaki  approached 
Ajatasatru  to  know  the  creator  of  the  purusas  (in  the  sun  etc.) 
who  had  been  presented  as  the  entity  to  be  known,  Ajatasatru, 


I.  iv.  16]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  277 

being  desirous  of  enlightening  Balaki,  called  a  sleeping  man  by 
name;25  and  then  from  the  fact  that  the  man  did  not  heed  the 
call,  Ajatasatru  made  Balaki  understand  that  the  vital  force  and 
the  rest  are  not  the  experiencer.  Lastly,  from  the  fact  of  waking 
up  as  a  result  of  being  struck  by  a  stick,  he  makes  him  under¬ 
stand  that  the  individual  soul,  which  is  different  from  the  vital 
force  and  the  rest,  is  the  experiencer.  Similarly  from  the  subse¬ 
quent  text  also  can  be  gathered  a  sign  indicative  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul:  “To  explain  this  point:  As  the  head  (of  a  guild) 
lives  on  (what  is  brought  by)  his  own  people  or  retinue,  or  as 
his  own  people  or  retinue  live  on  him,  so  also  this  conscious 
soul  (i.e.  the  individual)  lives  on  these  souls  (of  the  sun  etc.), 
and  these  souls  live  on  this  soul”26  (Kau.  IV.  20).  The  individual 
soul  can  well  be  called  the  vital  force,  for  it  sustains  the  vital 
force.  Hence  either  the  individual  soul  or  the  vital  force  is  to  be 
accepted  here,  but  not  the  supreme  Lord,  for  we  do  not  per¬ 
ceive  any  sign  to  indicate  Him. 

Vedantin  :  Faced  with  this,  we  say:  The  creator  of  these 
purusas  must  be  the  supreme  Lord  Himself. 

How? 

On  the  strength  of  how  the  topic  is  started  with.  For  Balaki 
started  to  talk  with  Ajatasatru  here  with  the  words:  “I  shall  tell 
you  of  Brahman”  (Kau.  IV.  1);  but  he  became  silent  after 
asserting  that  some  persons  ( purusas )  residing  in  the  sun  etc. 
are  fit  to  be  looked  upon  as  Brahman  in  the  primary  sense. 
Ajatasatru  then  told  him,  “Falsely  indeed  you  promised  me,  ‘I 
shall  tell  you  fully  of  Brahman’  ”,  and  thus  he  repudiated  Balaki 
for  speaking  of  those  that  were  Brahman  only  in  a  secondary 
sense.  Then  the  king  presented  another  as  the  creator  of  them 
all  and  as  the  entity  to  be  known.  Should  Ajatasatru  also  be  a 
seer  of  the  secondary  Brahman,  it  will  run  counter  to  the  com¬ 
mencement  of  the  text.  Therefore  this  must  be  the  supreme 
Lord.  And  the  creatorship  of  all  these  persons  cannot  be  thought 
of  as  belonging  exclusively  and  independently  to  any  one  other 
than  the  supreme  Lord.  The  text,  “He  of  whom  this  is  surely 
the  work”  (Kau.  IV.  19),  does  not  refer  either  to  actions  in  the 

“i.e.  the  synonyms  of  the  vital  force — Brhat ,  pdndaravdsa ,  soma,  rajan. 

“The  sun  etc.  give  him  light  etc.,  and  he  offers  them  oblation  etc. 


278  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  16 

form  of  movements  or  those  constituting  virtue  and  vice;  fox 
neither  are  they  under  discussion  nor  are  they  mentioned  by 
the  Upani$ad  by  name.  Nor  are  the  persons  indicated  thus  (as 
objects  of  the  verb  by  the  text,  “this  work”),  they  having  been 
already  mentioned  in,  “the  creator  of  these  persons”27  (Kau.  IV. 
19).  Besides,  that  would  involve  a  contradiction  in  gender  and 
number.28  Nor  is  it  indicative  of  some  action  (i.e.  creative  func¬ 
tion)  or  of  the  result  of  such  action  pertaining  to  the  persons 
(undertaken  by  the  creator);  for  these  have  already  been  re¬ 
ferred  to  by  the  word  “creator.”29  As  the  last  resort,  the  universe 
that  is  perceived  proximately  (or  directly)  is  referred  to  by 
the  word  “this”  (occurring  in  “this  work”);  and  that  very 
universe  is  referred  to  by  the  word  “work”  in  the  derivative 
sense  of  “that  which  is  accomplished”  (i.e.  product). 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  even  the  universe  is  not  under 
discussion,  nor  is  it  mentioned  by  name? 

Vedantin  :  Quite  so.  Still  from  the  fact  that  when  there  is  no 
specific  mention,  things  in  general  that  lie  near  at  hand30  become 
signified  by  a  pronoun  that  stands  for  proximate  things  in 
general;  but  it  does  not  mean  anything  specific,  for  nothing 
specific  is  near  at  hand.  Moreover,  the  persons  (in  the  sun  etc.), 
forming  a  part  of  the  universe,  had  been  specifically  mentioned 
earlier,  so  that  it  can  be  understood  that  the  unspecified  universe  is 
taken  up  here.  The  idea  expressed  is  this:  “He  who  is  the  creator 
of  these  purusas ,  constituting  a  part  of  the  universe,  or  rather, 
leaving  aside  such  a  specification,  He  of  whom  this  whole 
universe,  without  any  specification,  is  a  work”.  The  word 
“rather”  is  meant  for  rejecting  the  creatorship  of  a  limited  por¬ 
tion.  But  the  specific  mention  (of  the  purusas — persons)  is  made 
in  order  to  show  that  the  persons  spoken  of  as  Brahman  by 
Balaki  are  not  Brahman.  In  this  way,  through  general  and  specific 

WA  second  mention  is  redundant. 

“For  in  etat  karma  (this  work),  etat  is  neuter  and  singular,  whereas 
purusah  (persons)  is  plural  and  masculine. 

”  In  the  earlier  half  of  the  text,  “ ...  who  is  the  creator  of  these 
purusas”  (Kau.  IV.  19),  the  activity  of  creation  and  the  result  of  pro¬ 
ducing  the  persons  are  already  mentioned.  So  “this  work”,  occurring  in 
the  second  half  cannot  refer  to  these. 

“That  occurs  to  the  mind  as  the  object  of  activity. 


I.iv.  17] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -BHA5YA 


279 


statements,  on  the  analogy  of  “the  Brahmanas  and  mendicants”,81 
the  creator  of  the  universe  is  taught  as  the  entity  to  be  known. 
And  the  supreme  Lord  is  affirmed  as  the  creator  of  the  whole 
universe  by  all  the  Upanisads. 


Owing  to  the  presence  of  the  indicatory 
marks  of  the  individual  soul,  and  the  chief  Prana ,  not  so, 

^  if  this  be  the  objection,  ^  that  oq  polling  has  been 
already  explained. 


11.  If  it  be  contended  that  the  supreme  Self  is  not  meant , 
owing  to  the  presence  of  the  indicatory  marks  of  the  individual 
soul ’  and  the  chief  Prana ,  then  that  has  already  been  explained. 

Opponent :  Now  then,  the  argument  was  advanced  that  from 
the  indicatory  marks  of  the  individual  soul  and  the  chief  Prana 
(vital  force)  met  with  in  the  complementary  portion  of  the 
text,  either  of  the  two  must  be  accepted,  but  not  the  supreme 
Lord.  That  has  to  be  answered. 

Vedantin  :  With  regard  to  this  we  say:  This  was  repudiated 
under  the  aphorism,  “(If  it  be  argued  that  Brahman  is  not 
spoken  of  here,  since  there  are  the  indications  of  the  individual 
soul  and  the  chief  vital  force,  then  we  say),  that  cannot  be  so, 
since  this  will  lead  to  a  threefold  meditation.  Besides  Prjtya  is 
admitted  elsewhere  as  meaning  Brahman  (owing  to  the  presence 
of  Brahman’s  characteristics)  which  are  in  evidence  here”  (I  i. 
31).  For  on  such  an  assumption,  a  threefold  meditation  will 
crop  up  here — meditation  on  the  individual  soul,  on  the  vital 
force,  and  on  Brahman.  But  this  is  not  justifiable;  for  from  a 
consideration  of  how  the  passage  starts  and  ends,  it  is  seen  to 
refer  to  Brahman.  Of  these,  it  has  already  been  shown  how 
Brahman  is  dealt  with  at  the  commencement.  And  from  the 
mention  of  the  highest  result  (at  the  end),  the  concluding 

81  On  the  assumption  that  Brahmanas  alone  can  become  mendicants, 
when  some  one  says,  “Feed  the  Brahmanas  and  the  mendicants”,  the 
word  Brahmanas  is  to  be  understood  as  meaning  all  Brahmanas  who  are 
not  mendicants.  So  also  “work”  here  implies  the  creation  of  all  except  the 
Purusas ,  they  having  been  mentioned  separately. 


280  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  17 

portion  also  is  seen  to  point  to  Brahman  thus:  “He  who  knows 
thus,  destroys  all  the  sins  and  becomes  the  foremost  (in  attain¬ 
ment)  among  all,  sovereign  (over  all),  and  independent  (of  all)” 
(Kau.  IV.  20). 

Objection :  On  such  a  view,  the  ascertainment  of  the  meaning 
of  this  passage  is  anticipated  by  the  text  about  the  dialogue  of 
Pratardana  (under  B.S.  I.  i.  31). 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  the  sentence,  “Or  rather  He  of  whom 
this  surely  is  the  work”,  was  not  ascertained  there  as  pertain¬ 
ing  to  Brahman.  Accordingly,  the  doubt  about  the  individual 
soul  and  the  chief  vital  force  that  arises  here  again  is  set  aside 
over  again.  Moreover,  the  word  Prdzia  is  seen  to  be  used  in  the 
sense  of  Brahman:  “For,  O  amiable  one,  the  mind  (i.e.  soul)  is 
tethered  to  Prdria  (Brahman)”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  2).  As  for  the 
indicatory  signs  of  the  individual  soul  here,  they  are  to  be 
interpreted  as  used  from  the  standpoint  of  the  identity  (of  the 
soul  with  Brahman),  for  Brahman  is  known  to  be  the  subject- 
matter  of  discussion  from  the  consideration  of  the  beginning 
and  the  end. 

ll^ll 

g  But  srfafiT:  Jaimini  (holds):  ar^T-Bp^  (the  reference  to  be) 
for  a  different  purpose,  on  the  strength  of  the 

question  and  the  answer;  arfq  moreover,  some  people 
thus. 

18.  But  Jaimini  holds  the  reference  (to  the  individual  soul) 
to  be  meant  for  a  different  purpose ,  as  is  known  from  the 
question  and  the  answer .  Moreover ,  some  mention  this  clearly . 

Moreover,  there  need  be  no  dispute  here  as  to  whether  this 
text  has  the  individual  soul  primarily  in  view  or  Brahman;  for 
the  teacher  Jaimini  is  of  opinion  that  the  allusion  to  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  in  this  text  is  meant  for  a  different  purpose,  viz  the 
comprehension  of  Brahman. 

How? 

“On  the  strength  of  the  question  and  the  explanation.”  As 
for  the  question,  it  is  seen  that  when  it  has  been  demonstrated 


I.  iv.  18]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  281 

by  waking  a  sleeping  man  that  the  individual  soul  is  distinct 
from  the  vital  force  etc.,  there  occurs  another  question  with 
regard  to  something  beyond  the  individual  soul:  “O  Balaki, 
where  did  this  person  sleep?  Or  where  did  he  stay  thus,  and 
whence  did  he  come  thus?”  (Kau.  IV.  19).  The  answer  also 
is:  “When  a  sleeping  man  dreams  no  more,  then  he  becomes 
unified  with  Prana  Itself”  etc.,  as  also,  “From  this  Self  the  organs 
move  towards  their  own  seats;  from  the  organs  issue  the  presid¬ 
ing  deities;  from  the  deities  issue  the  sense-objects”  (ibid.). 
Now  it  is  a  settled  conclusion  of  the  Upani§ads  that  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  becomes  unified  with  the  supreme  Self  in  sleep,  and 
that  the  universe,  inclusive  of  the  organs  etc.,  issues  from  the 
supreme  Self.  So  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  entity  in  which 
this  individual  being  has  an  absence  of  particularized  knowledge, 
in  which  it  has  its  deep  sleep,  consisting  in  the  absence  of  the 
defect  of  perturbation,  in  which  it  has  its  real  nature  of  free¬ 
dom  from  particularized  knowledge  caused  by  limiting  adjuncts, 
from  which  occurs  its  emergence,  consisting  in  a  break  in  that 
state — that  entity  is  the  supreme  Self,  taught  here  as  the  thing  to 
be  known.  Besides,  in  this  very  context  of  the  conversation 
between  Balaki  and  Ajata£atru,  the  followers  of  a  certain  recen¬ 
sion,  viz  the  Vajasaneyins,  mention  clearly  the  individual  soul  by 
the  term  “ v\]nanamaya ”  (identified  with  the  intellect),  and  then 
read  of  the  supreme  Self,  beyond  it,  in  the  question,  “When 
this  being,  identified  with  the  intellect,  was  thus  asleep,  where 
was  it,  and  whence  did  it  thus  come?”  (Bj\  II.  i.  16).  In  the 
answer  also  they  recite:  “  . . .  and  lies  in  the  Space  (supreme  Self) 
that  is  in  the  heart”  (Bf.  II.  i.  17).  The  word  Space  is  used  for 
the  supreme  Self,  as  in  “the  small  Space  that  is  inside  it”  (Ch. 
VIII.  i.  1).  It  is  to  be  understood  here  in  the  Bj-hadaranyaka  that 
when  they  mention  the  emanation  of  the  conditioned  self  from 
some  other  entity  in  the  text,  “All  these  seifs  emanate”  (Bf.  II. 
i.  20),  they  really  point  to  the  supreme  Self  as  the  source.  And 
the  instruction  about  (the  individual  soul  as)  an  entity  other 
than  the  vital  force,  that  is  imparted  with  the  help  of  the  act  of 
waking  up  a  sleeping  man,  is  an  additional  reason  ruling  out  the 
vital  force. 


282 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  6:  Correlation  of  Passages 


[I.  iv.  19 


^TFcRTI^  il^n 

19.  (The  Self  to  be  realized ,  heard  of,  reflected  on,  and  pro - 
foundly  meditated  upon  is  the  supreme  Self),  because  (this  is 
the  meaning  gathered)  from  the  correlation  of  the  passages . 

Doubt :  Starting  with:  “It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  the  husband, 
my  dear,  that'  he  is  loved,”  it  is  said,  in  the  Maitreyi  Brahmana 
of  the  Bfhadaranyaka  Upani?ad,  “It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  all, 
my  dear,  that  all  is  loved,  but  for  one’s  own  sake  that  all  is 
loved.  The  Self,  my  dear  Maitreyi,  should  be  realized — should 
be  heard  of,  reflected  on,  and  profoundly  meditated  upon.  By 
the  realization  of  the  Self,  my  dear,  through  hearing,  reflection, 
and  profound  meditation,  all  this  is  known”  (II.  iv.  5,  IV.  v.  6). 
About  this  the  doubt  arises:  Is  it  the  individual  soul,  identified 
with  the  intellect,  that  is  taught  to  be  realized,  heard  of,  etc.  or 
is  it  the  supreme  Self? 

Why,  again,  should  there  be  this  doubt? 

Since  the  start  is  made  with  the  enjoying  soul,  called  up  by 
the  suggestive  word  “loved”,32  it  appears  that  the  individual  soul 
identified  with  the  intellect  is  meant.  Again,  from  the  instruc¬ 
tion  that  all  is  known  when  the  Self  is  known,  it  would  seem 
that  the  supreme  Self  is  meant.  What  should  be  the  conclusion 
then? 

Opponent :  This  is  an  instruction  about  the  individual  soul. 

Why? 

On  the  strength  of  the  commencement.  It  is  said  at  the  start 
that  this  whole  universe  of  enjoyment,  consisting  of  husband, 
wife,  son,  and  others,  is  loved  for  the  sake  of  oneself.  In  this 
passage  the  enjoying  soul  is  presented  through  the  suggestive 
word  love;  and  then  when  the  seeing  (i.e.  realization)  etc.  are 
taught  of  the  Self,  to  what  other  Self  (apart  from  the  individual) 
can  this  refer?  In  the  middle  also  it  is  taught,  “ . . .  even  so,  my 
dear,  this  great,  endless,  infinite  Reality  is  but  pure  intelligence. 

“Such  lovable  objects  suggest  that  they  have  some  one,  a  soul,  as  their 
enjoyer. 


I.  iv.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  283 

(The  Self)  comes  out  (as  a  separate  entity)  from  these  ele¬ 
ments,  and  (this  separateness)  is  destroyed  with  them.  After 
attaining  (this  oneness)  it  has  no  more  (particularized)  con¬ 
sciousness”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  12,  IV.  v.  13),  where  the  “great  Reality”, 
which  has  to  be  realized,  is  spoken  of  as  “coming  out  from 
the  elements”  in  the  form  of  an  individual  being  identified  with 
the  intellect;  and  thereby  it  is  revealed  that  it  is  the  individual 
being  (identified  with  the  intellect)  that  has  to  be  realized. 
Similarly  when  the  conclusion  is  made  in  the  text  thus: 
“Through  what,  my  dear,  should  one  know  the  knower?”  (Bj\ 

II.  iv.  14,  IV.  v.  15),  with  a  word  (viz  knower)  denoting  an 
agent  of  knowing,  it  is  shown  that  the  individual  soul  is  taught 
here.  Accordingly,  the  statement  about  the  knowledge  of  every¬ 
thing  accruing  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  must  be  taken 
in  a  secondary  sense  to  indicate  all  the  enjoyable  things  meant 
for  the  enjoying  soul.88 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  This  is  an  instruc¬ 
tion  about  the  supreme  Self  Itself. 

Why? 

On  the  strength  of  the  correlation  of  this  with  other  passages. 
When  this  passage  is  examined  in  its  proper  context,  its  parts 
are  seen  to  be  linked  up  with  the  supreme  Self. 

How? 

That  is  being  shown.  Hearing  from  Yajnavalkya,  “But  there 
is  no  hope  of  immortality  through  wealth”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  2,  IV. 
v.  3),  Maitreyl  expresses  her  desire  for  instruction  about  immor¬ 
tality  in  these  words:  “What  shall  I  do  with  that  which  will 
not  make  me  immortal?  Tell  me,  sir,  of  that  alone  which  you 
know  (to  be  the  only  means  of  immortality)”  (Br.  II.  iv.  3, 
IV.  v.  4).  Then  Yajnavalkya  imparts  to  her  the  knowledge  of 
the  Self.  And  the  texts  of  the  Upani$ads  and  Smj*tis  declare  that 
there  can  be  no  immortality  from  anything  other  than  the 
knowledge  of  the  Self.  Similarly  when  it  is  stated  that  the 
knowledge  of  everything  results  from  the  knowledge  of  the 
Self,  it  cannot  bear  any  literal  import  unless  the  knowledge  of 

83  Since  the  enjoyer  is  the  master  of  the  enjoyable  things,  it  is  said 
figuratively  that  all  enjoyable  things  become  known  when  the  enjoying 
soul  is  known. 


284 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[I.  iv.  19 


the  supreme  Cause  be  meant.  And  we  cannot  resort  to  any 
secondary  meaning  here,  since  the  assertion  is  first  made  that 
everything  is  known  by  knowing  the  Self,  and  then  it  is 
expounded  by  saying,  “The  Brahmapa  ousts  one  who  knows 
him  as  different  from  the  Self”  etc.  (Bf.  II.  iv.  6,  IV.  v.  7). 
For  a  false  perceiver,  who  perceives  the  universe,  consisting  of 
Brahmanas,  K$atriyas,  and  others,  as  having  emerged  into  exist¬ 
ence  independently  of  the  Self,  is  ousted  by  that  very  falsely 
apprehended  universe  of  Brahmaiias,  K$atriyas,  and  others.  After 
repudiating  the  dualistic  vision  thus,  the  Upani§ad  broaches  the 
topic  of  the  non-difference  of  all  things  from  Brahman  by 
saying,  “...and  this  all  are  this  Self”  (Bj*.  II.  iv.  6,  IV.  v.  7). 
Again,  that ‘very  non-difference  is  confirmed  with  the  illustra¬ 
tion  of  the  drum  etc.  (Bf.  II.  iv.  7-9,  IV.  v.  8-10).  Besides,  when 
in  the  text,  “ . . .  the  Rg-Veda,  (etc.)  are  like  the  breath  of  this 
infinite  Reality”  (Bj:.  IV.  v.  11),  the  Upanisad  states  that  the 
Self  under  consideration  is  the  source  of  this  vast  expanse  of 
name,  form,  and  action,  it  only  shows  that  this  Self  is  nothing 
but  the  supreme  Self.  Again,  when  with  the  help  of  the  process 
of  merger  in  the  same  thing  (Br.  IV.  v.  12),  the  Upani$ad  speaks 
of  the  Self  as  the  goal  of  the  whole  universe  of  sense-objects, 
senses,  and  internal  organs,  and  as  without  interior  and  exterior, 
and  wholly  a  mass  of  pure  intelligence  (Br.  IV.  v.  13),  it  only 
shows  that  this  Self  is  the  supreme  Self.  Therefore  it  is  under¬ 
stood  that  this  instruction  about  realization  etc.  is  concerned 
with  the  supreme  Self  alone. 

The  further  objection  was  raised  that  from  the  way  the  start 
is  made  with  the  suggestive  word  love,  the  realization  etc.  that 
are  taught  here  are  of  the  individual  soul.  Our  reply  is: 

:  Of  the  fulfilment  of  the  declaration  (this  is) 

an  indication  (thinks)  Asmarathya. 

20.  Asmarathya.  thinks  this  (statement  of  non-difference 
between  the  individual  soul  and  supreme  Self)  to  be  a  sign 
indicative  of  the  fulfilment  of  the  declaration. 


I.iv.  21]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  285 

A  solemn  declaration  is  made  here  (in  the  text  under  discus¬ 
sion)  that  all  this  becomes  known  when  the  Self  is  known  (Br. 
IV.  v.  6),  as  also,  “ . . .  and  all  this  are  the  Self”  (Br.  IV.  v.  7). 
The  mention  of  the  Self,  called  up  by  the  suggestive  word  love, 
as  an  entity  to  be  realized  and  so  on,  is  a  sign  indicating  the 
fulfilment  of  that  declaration.  Were  the  individual  soul  different 
from  the  supreme  Self,  the  individual  soul  would  remain  un¬ 
known  even  when  the  supreme  Self  became  realized,  so  that 
the  promise  made  that  everything  becomes  known  by  knowing 
one  would  be  falsified.  Hence  the  teacher  Asmarathya  thinks 
that  it  is  with  a  view  to  fulfilling  the  declaration  that  the  start 
is  made  with  the  help  of  the  non-different  aspects  of  the 
supreme  Self  and  the  individual  Self.34 

SctpfoaRT  !R?II 

since  such  becomes  the  state  of  one 

who  is  about  to  die  this  is  what  Aucjulomi  (says). 

21.  Audulomi  says  that  (the  statement  about  the  identity  of 
the  individual  soul  and  the  supreme  Self  occurs  in  the  beginning) 
since  this  state  of  identity  comes  to  the  soul  'when  it  departs 
from  the  body. 

The  teacher  Audulomi  thinks  that  the  start  is  made  with  the 
individual  soul  in  a  way  as  though  it  is  identified  with  the 
supreme  Self,  because  the  individual  soul,  remaining  tainted  on 
account  of  its  association  with  the  aggregate  of  body,  senses, 
mind,  and  intellect,  becomes  serene  (and  purified)  through  the 
practice  of  knowledge,  meditation,  etc.;  and  as  such,  it  can 
justifiably  be  united  with  the  supreme  Self  only  after  it  departs 
from  this  assemblage  of  body  etc.  In  support  of  this,  occurs  the 
Upani$adic  text,  “This  serene  one  (i.e.  the  individual  soul)  rises 
up  from  this  body  and  realizing  the  supreme  Light  becomes 
established  in  its  true  nature”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3).  Besides,  in  some 

84  Both  partial  difference  and  partial  non-difference  exist  between  the 
two  Selves.  To  fulfil  the  declaration,  the  individual  is  made  the  starting 
point,  keeping  the  eye  only  on  those  of  its  aspects  that  are  non-different 
from  the  supreme  Self — this  is  how  Asmarathya  thinks. 


286 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


II.iv.2l 


texts  it  is  shown  with  the  help  of  the  simile  of  the  river,  that 
name  and  form  also  rest  on  the  individual  soul:  “As  rivers, 
flowing  down,  become  indistinguishable  on  reaching  the  sea,  by 
giving  up  their  names  and  forms,  so  also  the  illumined  soul, 
having  become  freed  from  name  and  form,  reaches  the  self- 
effulgent  Puru§a  that  is  higher  than  the  higher  (Maya)”  (Mu. 
III.  ii.  8).  In  keeping  with  the  parallelism  between  the  illustration 
and  the  thing  illustrated,  the  meaning  of  the  verse  is  obviously 
this:  Just  as  in  this  world  the  rivers  approach  the  sea  by  dis¬ 
carding  the  names  and  forms  belonging  to  themselves,  so  also 
the  individual  being  approaches  the  higher  Puru$a  by  discarding 
the  name  and  form  belonging  to  itself. 

VR'IicW:  IRRII 

Owing  to  the  existence  (of  the  supreme  Self  as  the 
individual  Self)  so  says  Kasalqrtsna. 

22.  Kafakrtsna  thinks  (the  statement  about  the  identity  in  the 
beginning  of  the  text  is  in  order)  because  of  the  existence  of 
the  supreme  Self  as  the  individual  soul 

The  teacher  Kasakftsna  opines  that  inasmuch  as  this  very 
supreme  Self  exists  as  the  individual  soul,  this  commencement 
with  a  statement  of  identity  is  quite  in  order.  In  conformity 
with  this  occur  such  brahmana  texts  as:  “Let  me  manifest  name 
and  form  by  Myself  entering  in  the  form  of  this  individual 
being”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2),  and  so  on,  which  reveal  the  existence  of 
the  supreme  Self  as  the  individual  soul.  There  are  mantra  texts 
also  such  as:  “(One  becomes  immortal  by  knowing)  that  omnis¬ 
cient  Being,  who  after  having  created  all  the  forms  (i.e.  pro¬ 
ducts),  and  given  names  to  them  (has  entered  into  them) 
and  exists  there  by  performing  the  acts  of  talking  (etc.)” 
(Tai.  A.  III.  xii.  7).  While  speaking  of  the  creation  of  light  etc. 
the  Upani$ad  does  not  make  any  separate  mention  of  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  the  individual  soul,  in  which  case  alone  the  soul  could 
have  been  different  from  the  supreme  Self,  it  being  (in  that 
case)  a  product  of  the  Self. 

The  view  of  the  teacher  KaSalqrtsna  is  that  the  supreme  Lord 


I.iv.22]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  287 

Himself  appears  as  the  individual  soul  without  undergoing  any 
change.  As  for  A£marathya,  though  the  non-difference  of  the 
individual  soul  from  the  supreme  Self  is  admitted  by  him,  still 
from  his  conditional  statement,  “For  the  fulfilment  of  the 
declaration”  etc.,  it  becomes  clear  that  his  intention  is  to  posit 
some  sort  of  relationship  as  found  between  a  cause  and  its 
effects.  According  to  Audulomi,  both  difference  and  non¬ 
difference  become  clearly  discernible  as  bound  up  with  the 
different  states  (of  the  soul  under  bondage  and  freedom).  Of 
these,  the  view  of  Kasakftsna  is  understood  to  be  in  accord  with 
the  Upanisads,  for  it  agrees  with  the  instruction  sought  to  be 
imparted,  as  stated  in  such  texts  as,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7),  and  from  this  standpoint,  (of  non-difference),  the 
attainment  of  immortality  as  a  result  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
Self  is  quite  in  order.  But  if  the  individual  soul  be  a  created 
thing  (as  Aimarathya  thinks),  then  since  the  modification  of  a 
substance  loses  itself  on  merging  into  its  material  cause,  the 
assertion  of  the  attainment  of  immortality  through  knowledge 
does  not  become  logical.35  (Just  because  immortality  can  result 
from  knowledge  only  if  the  difference  is  imaginary),  therefore 
(contrary  to  what  Audulomi  thinks)  name  and  form  cannot  be 
the  natural  appendages  of  the  individual  soul.  Hence  also  the 
name  and  form  belong  to  the  limiting  adjuncts;  but  they  are 
stated  by  way  of  concession  (to  common  experience)  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  the  soul.  For  this  very  reason,  the  origin  of  the  individual 
being,  that  is  sometimes  mentioned  in  the  Upanisads  with  the 
help  of  the  simile  of  sparks  darting  out  from  fire,  should  be 
understood  as  spoken  of  from  the  standpoint  of  the  limiting 
adjuncts  alone. 

Furthermore,  it  was  argued  thus:  When  it  is  shown  that  the 
“great  Reality”,  that  is  to  be  realized  and  that  is  under  discus¬ 
sion,  “comes  out  from  the  elements  in  the  form  of  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  12),  what  is  really  presented  as  the  entity 
to  be  realized  is  the  individual  soul.  For  the  refutation  of  this 

“An  imaginary  difference  can  be  removed  by  knowledge;  but  the 
assertion  of  any  real  difference  rules  out  that  possibility.  Besides,  the 
acceptance  of  origin  and  annihilation  for  the  soul  will  militate  against 
the  earlier  assertion  of  birthlessness  and  immortality  for  it. 


288  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I-  iv.  22 

argument  as  well,  these  three  aphorisms  are  to  be  interpreted 
thus:  “Asmarathya  thinks  this  reference  to  the  realization  etc. 
of  the  Self  to  be  a  sign  indicative  of  the  fulfilment  of  the 
declaration” — the  declaration  alluded  to  here  being,  “Every¬ 
thing  becomes  known  when  the  Self  is  known”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  5), 
and  “ . . .  all  this  are  the  Self”  (Bj\  IV.  v.  7).  This  stands  proved 
by  reason  of  all  the  modes  of  manifestation  of  name  and  form 
emerging  from  and  merging  into  the  same  single  entity,  and  by 
reason  of  demonstrating  the  identity  of  the  cause  and  effect 
through  the  illustration  of  the  drum  etc.  And  the  teacher 
A&narathya  is  of  opinion  that  the  statement  made  about  the 
“coming  out  of  the  great  Reality  from  the  great  elements  in  the 
form  of  the  individual  soul”  is  a  sign  indicative  of  the  fulfilment 
of  the  declaration;  for  the  knowledge  of  one  thing  can  lead  to 
the  knowledge  of  all  if  there  is  identity  among  them.  “Audu- 
lomi  says  that  since  this  state  of  identity  comes  to  the  soul 
when  it  departs  from  the  body” — the  teacher  Au<Julomi  thinks 
that  this  statement  about  identity  is  made  just  because  an  identity 
with  the  supreme  Self  is  possible  for  the  individual  soul  when, 
after  becoming  purified  through  knowledge  and  meditation,  it 
departs  from  the  body.  “Kasak^tsna  thinks  (that  this  is  so) 
because  of  the  existence  of  the  supreme  Self  as  the  individual 
soul” — the  teacher  Kasakftsna  is  of  opinion  that  since  it  is  the 
very  supreme  Self  that  exists  in  the  form  of  the  individual  soul, 
this  statement  of  non-difference  is  justifiable. 

Opponent :  The  statement — “The  Self  comes  out  from  these 
elements  and  is  destroyed  with  them.  After  this  attainment  there 
is  no  more  consciousness”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  12) — being  a  statement  of 
annihilation,  how  can  this  be  a  declaration  of  non-difference? 

Vedmtin :  There  is  no  such  difficulty;  for  this  statement 
about  destruction  relates  to  the  eradication  of  particularized 
knowledge,  but  not  to  the  annihilation  of  the  soul.  For  after 
reverting  to  the  topic  with,  “Just  here  you  have  thrown  me  into 
confusion  sir,”  (Bjr.  II.  iv.  13),  the  Upani$ad  itself  shows  a 
different  meaning  in:  “Certainly  I  am  not  saying  anything 
confusing.  This  Self  is  indeed  immutable  and  indestructible,  my 
dear.  But  there  is  a  dissociation  for  it  from  the  sense-objects” 
(Bj%  IV.  v.  14).  The  idea  is  this:  The  individual  soul  is  verily 


I.  iv.  22]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  289 

unchanging,  eternal,  and  a  mass  of  homogeneous  consciousness; 
there  can  be  no  possibility  of  its  annihilation.  But  as  a  result  of 
knowledge,  there  is  a  dissociation  for  it  from  the  matras  com¬ 
prising  the  senses  and  the  elements  that  originate  from  igno¬ 
rance.  And  since  from  an  absence  of  contact,  particularized 
knowledge  arising  from  that  contact  cannot  exist,  it  has  been 
said,  “After  this  attainment  there  is  no  consciousness’’. 

The  further  assertion  was  made  that  this  realization  is  of  the 
individual  Self  itself,  for  in  the  concluding  portion,  “Through 
what,  my  dear,  should  one  know  the  knower?”  (Bj*.  II.  iv.  14), 
occurs  a  word  (viz  knower)  suggestive  of  one  who  knows. 
That  also  is  to  be  refuted  with  the  help  of  Kasalqrtsna’s  view. 
Moreover,  in  the  text  commencing  with,  “Because  when  there 
is  duality,  as  it  were,  then  one  sees  something”  (Br.  IV.  v.  IS), 
it  is  stated  elaborately  that  for  that  selfsame  soul  there  is 
particularized  knowledge  when  it  is  within  the  range  of  igno¬ 
rance.  And  then  in  the  text,  starting  with,  “But  when  to  the 
knower  of  Brahman  everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what 
should  one  see  and  through  what?”  (ibid.),  it  is  shown  that  for 
that  very  soul  there  is  an  absence  of  particularized  knowledge 
like  seeing  etc.  when  it  is  within  the  ambit  of  illumination.  Then, 
again,  the  apprehension  is  raised  that  even  though  there  be  no 
other  object  of  knowledge,  still  one  may  know  the  Self;  and  in 
answer  to  this  it  is  said,  “Through  what,  my  dear,  should  one 
know  the  knower?”  (ibid.).  Hence  from  the  fact  that  the  text 
is  devoted  to  the  proving  of  the  absence  of  particularized 
knowledge,  it  can  be  understood  that,  though  the  Self  is  Con¬ 
sciousness  Itself  and  remains  for  ever  in  Its  absoluteness,  still 
by  keeping  in  mind  how  It  had  appeared  (in  the  state  of  igno¬ 
rance),  It  is  referred  to  by  the  word  vijndta  (knower),  formed 
with  the  suffix  tre  and  conveying  the  sense  of  an  agent  of  the 
act  (of  knowing).  It  was  shown  earlier  that  the  view  of 
Kasakftsna  accords  with  the  Upani$ads.  So  the  interpretation 
that  should  be  accepted  by  all  those  who  follow  the  Upanisads 
is  that  the  difference  between  the  individual  Self  and  the 
supreme  Self  is  a  creation  of  conditioning  factors  like  body 
etc.  constituted  by  name  and  form  which  are  conjured  up  by 
nescience;  the  difference  is  not  real;  for  this  view  is  supported 
19 


290  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.iv.22 

by  such  Upani$adic  texts  as:  “O  amiable  one,  in  the  beginning, 
all  this  was  but  Existence,  one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1), 
“All  this  is  but  the  Self”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  3),  “All  this  is  but 
Brahman”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11),  “...and  all  this  are  the  Self”  (Br. 
II.  iv.  6),  “There  is  no  other  witness  but  Him”  (Bj*.  III.  vii.  23), 
“There  is  no  other  witness  but  this”  (Br.  III.  viii.).  and  so  on; 
as  also  by  such  Smrti  texts  as,  “ . . .  that  all  this  is  Vasudeva” 
(Gita,  VII.  9),  “O  scion  of  the  race  of  Bharata,  know  Me  also 
to  be  the  individual  witness  in  all  the  bodies”  (ibid.  XIII.  2), 
“ . . .  the  Lord  Supreme,  existng  equally  in  all  beings”  (ibid. 
XIII.  27),  and  so  on.  Furthermore,  the  same  conclusion  follows 
from  the  rejection  of  the  dualistic  outlook  in,  “While  he  who 
worships  another  god,  thinking,  ‘He  is  one  and  I  am  another’, 
does  not  know.  He  is  like  an  animal  to  the  gods”  (Br.  I.  iv.  10). 
“He  goes  from  death  to  death  who  sees  difference,  as  it  were, 
in  It”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  18),  and  similar  other  passages.  Besides,  all 
changes  are  denied  in  the  Self  by  the  passage,  “The  great  birth¬ 
less  Self  is  undecaying,  immortal,  undying,  fearless,  and  Brahman 
(infinite)”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  25).  For  unless  this  be  understood  thus, 
the  aspirants  for  liberation  will  not  have  any  illumination  that 
defies  sublation;  nor  can  any  knowledge  be  gained  by  them 
that  carries  with  itself  the  fullest  conviction.  For  the  knowledge 
about  the  Self  that  is  sought  here  is  that  knowledge  alone  that 
is  beyond  all  refutation  and  sets  at  rest  all  questions,  as 
declared  by  the  Upanisadic  passage,  “Those  to  whom  the  entity, 
presented  by  the  Vedic  knowledge,  has  become  fully  ascer¬ 
tained”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  6),  as  also,  “What  delusion  and  what  sorrow 
can  persist  there  for  one  who  has  realized  Unity?”  (Is.  7).  This 
follows  also  from  the  Smrti  text,  setting  forth  the  characteristics 
of  the  man  of  steady  wisdom  (Gita,  II.  55-72).  When  the  full 
illumination  about  the  oneness  of  the  Supreme  Self  and  the 
Self  witnessing  the  body  becomes  established,  such  terms  as  “the 
witness  of  the  body”,  “the  supreme  Self”  betrays  a  mere  dif¬ 
ference  in  terminology;  and  hence  this  insistence  on  the  theory 
that  this  “witness  of  the  body”  is  different  from  the  supreme 
Self  and  the  supreme  Self  is  different  from  the  “witness  of  the 
body”,  that  centres  round  the  idea  of  difference  of  the  two 
Selves,  is  meaningless.  For  the  Self  is  but  one,  though  spoken  of 


I.  iv.  23] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


291 


differently  on  the  basis  of  difference  in  mere  nomenclature.  Not 
that  the  text,  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite.  He  who 
knows  that  Brahman  as  existing  in  the  cavity  of  the  intellect” 
(Tai.  II.  i),  is  spoken  of  in  relation  to  any  particular  cavity;  nor 
does  anything  else  but  Brahman  exist  in  the  cavity  (of  the  intel¬ 
lect),  since  we  hear  of  the  entry  of  the  Creator  Himself  in  the 
text,  “Having  created  that,  He  entered  into  that”  (Tai.  II.  vi). 
Those  who  insist  on  difference,  shut  the  door  to  the  under¬ 
standing  of  the  purport  of  the  Upani$ads  and  thereby  shut  out 
full  illumination  itself  that  leads  to  liberation.  Moreover,  they 
fancy  that  liberation  is  a  product  and  impermanent,  and  they 
do  not  conform  to  logic. 

Topic  7:  Brahman  as  Material  Cause 


(Brahman  is)  the  material  cause  ^  as  well 

so  as  not  to  contradict  the  proposition  and  the  illus¬ 
tration. 

23.  Brahman  must  be  the  material  cause  as  well ,  so  as  not  to 
contradict  the  proposition  and  the  illustration . 

Doubt :  It  has  been  said  that  just  as  virtue  and  vice  are  to  be 
deliberated  on  since  this  leads  to  secular  well-being,  so  also 
Brahman  is  to  be  deliberated  on  since  this  leads  to  liberation. 
And  Brahman  was  defined  as  “That  from  which  the  universe  has 
its  birth  etc.”  (I.  i.  2).  That  definition  is  applicable  either  to 
the  material  cause  in  the  sense  in  which  earth,  gold,  etc.  are 
the  causes  of  pots,  necklaces,  etc.,  or  to  the  efficient  cause  in 
the  sense  in  which  a  potter,  a  goldsmith,  and  others  are  the 
causes.  Therefore  the  doubt  arises:  In  what,  again,  does 
Brahman’s  causality  consist? 

Opponent :  While  under  such  a  predicament,  it  would  appear 
that  It  can  only  be  the  efficient  cause. 

Why? 

For  creatorship,  preceded  by  reflection  is  heard  of.  From  such 
Upani$adic  texts  as,  “He  deliberated”  (Pr.  VI.  3),  “He  created 


292  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iv.23 

the  vital  force”  (Pr.  VI.  4),  the  causality  of  Brahman  is  under¬ 
stood  to  have  been  preceded  by  reflection.  And  creation  after 
reflection  is  noticed  in  the  cases  of  efficient  causes  like  the 
potter  and  others.  It  is  also  seen  in  the  world  that  success  in  a 
work  depends  on  many  accessories.  That  logic  should  be  ex¬ 
tended  to  the  first  Creator  as  well.  Besides,  this  follows  from 
the  fact  of  His  being  well  known  as  the  Lord;  for  efficient 
causality  is  alone  noticed  in  the  cases  of  lordly  beings  like  kings, 
Death,  and  others.  In  conformity  with  this  it  is  but  proper  to 
understand  efficient  causality  alone  even  in  the  case  of  the 
supreme  Lord.  Besides,  this  universe,  which  is  a  product,  is 
seen  to  be  composite,  insentient,  and  impure;  so  its  material 
cause,  too,  must  be  of  the  same  nature,  since  the  cause  and 
effect  are  seen  to  be  similar.  But  Brahman  is  known  to  be  devoid 
of  such  a  nature  from  such  texts  as,  “Without  parts,  motionless, 
unchanging,  taintless,  and  free  from  tamos”  (§v.  VI.  19).  As  a 
last  resort,  some  material  cause,  other  than  Brahman,  that  is  well 
recognized  in  the  Smjtis  and  is  possessed  of  the  characteristics  of 
impurity  etc.,  has  to  be  admitted;  for  the  Upani$ads  speaking 
of  Brahman  as  the  origin,  speak  of  nothing  more  than  efficient 
causality. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  Brahman  has  to 
be  admitted  as  the  material  cause  as  well  as  the  efficient  cause. 
It  is  not  merely  the  efficient  cause. 

Why? 

“So  that  the  proposition  and  the  illustration  may  not  be  con¬ 
tradicted.”  Of  these  the  proposition  is:  “Now  then,  did  you  ask 
about  that  subject-matter  of  instruction  by  which  the  unheard 
becomes  heard,  the  unthought  becomes  thought,  and  the  un¬ 
known  becomes  known?”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  2),  where  it  is  obvious 
that  by  knowing  one  thing  all  other  things,  even  though  un¬ 
known,  become  known.  And  that  knowledge  of  all  things  can 
be  possible  only  from  the  knowledge  of  their  material  cause, 
since  the  effect  is  non-different  from  its  material,  whereas 
the  effect  is  not  non-different  from  its  efficient  cause,  as  is 
evident  from  the  difference  noticed  in  the  world  between  the 
architect  and  his  architecture.  The  illustration  cited  also  relates 
to  the  material  cause,  as  in,  “O  amiable  one,  as  by  knowing  a 


I.  iv.  23  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  293 

lump  of  earth,  all  things  made  of  earth  become  known,  since 
earth  alone  is  true  and  all  transformations  exist  only  in  name, 
having  speech  as  their  origin  (or  support)”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  4). 
Similar  also  are  the  illustrations:  “All  modifications  of  gold 
become  known  by  knowing  a  piece  of  gold”,  “AJ1  things  made 
of  iron  become  known  when  a  nail-cutter  is  known”  (Ch.  VI. 
i.  5-6).  So  also  it  is  seen  in  the  other  Upanisads  that  the  propo¬ 
sition  is  stated  thus:  “O  adorable  sir,  (which  is  that  thing)  which 
having  been  known,  all  this  becomes  known?”  (Mu.  I.  i.  3), 
and  the  illustration  is:  “As  herbs  grow  on  the  earth”  (Mu. 
I.  i.  7).  Elsewhere,  too,  the  proposition  is:  “All  this,  my  dear, 
becomes  known  when  the  Self  is  seen,  heard  of,  reflected  on, 
and  meditated  upon”  (Bj\  IV.  v.  6),  and  the  illustration  is:  “As 
when  a  drum  is  beaten,  one  cannot  distinguish  its  various  partic¬ 
ular  notes,  but  they  are  included  in  the  general  note  of  the 
drum  or  in  the  general  sound  produced  by  different  kinds  of 
strokes”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  8).  In  this  way,  in  each  Upani$ad,  the 
proposition  and  illustration  are  to  be  understood,  so  far  as  they 
go,  as  pointing  to  the  material  cause.  The  phrase,  “that  from 
which — yatah ”  occurring  in,  “That  from  which  these  beings 
emerge”  (Tai.  III.  i.),  is  to  be  understood  as  pointing  to  the 
material  constituting  the  basic  substance,  in  accordance  with 
the  special  rule  of  grammar,  “The  basic  substance  of  anything 
that  is  being  bom  is  used  in  the  ablative  case  (i.e.  with  the 
pronoun,  from)”  (Pa.  Su.  I.  iv.  30).  As  for  the  efficient  causality 
of  Brahman,  it  is  to  be  understood  from  the  absence  of  any 
other  ordainer.  Unlike  the  basic  substances  like  earth,  gold,  etc., 
acting  under  the  control  of  their  moulders — the  potter,  gold¬ 
smith,  and  others — Brahman,  even  though  It  is  a  basic  substance, 
does  not  depend  on  any  other  ordainer;  for  it  is  emphasized  that 
before  creation,  all  this  was  but  one  without  a  second.  And  it 
is  to  be  understood  that  this  absence  of  any  other  ordainer  has 
to  be  assumed  so  that  no  conflict  between  the  proposition  and 
the  illustration  may  arise.  For  if  any  ordainer  be  admitted  apart 
from  the  material,  it  will  become  impossible  again  to  have  a 
knowledge  of  all  from  the  knowledge  of  one,  and  so  the  propo¬ 
sition  and  the  illustration  will  be  at  variance.  Accordingly,  the 


294  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [I.  iv.  23 

Self  is  the  ordainer  since  there  is  no  other  designer,  and  It  is 
also  the  material  cause  since  there  is  no  other  material. 

What  more  reason  is  there  to  show  that  the  Self  is  the  agent 
as  well  as  the  material? 

arfoarta&nw  irvii 

=ST  And  srf^T-3q^irer  because  of  the  teaching  about  the 
will  to  create. 

24.  This  is  also  understood  from  the  teaching  about  the  'will 
to  create . 

“The  teaching  about  the  will  to  create”,  also  leads  to  the 
understanding  of  the  Self  as  the  efficient  and  material  cause: 
“He  wished,  ‘let  me  be  many,  let  me  be  bom’”  (Tai.  II.  v.  2), 
and  “It  deliberated,  ‘I  shall  become  many,  I  shall  be  born’  ”  (Ch. 
VI.  ii.  3).  In  those  texts  the  Self  is  known  to  be  the  agent  by 
virtue  of  independent  action  proceeding  from  deliberation.  And 
it  is  understood  that  the  Self  is  the  material  cause  as  well,  since 
the  will  to  become  many  as  expressed  in,  “I  shall  become  many”, 
relates  to  Himself. 


IR50I 

XT  And  ^*T?-3rrRPTr^  both  having  been  taught  directly. 

25.  And  because  both  (origin  and  dissolution )  are  taught 
directly  (from  Brahman). 

This  is  again  in  continuation  of  the  material  causality. 
Brahman  is  the  material  cause  for  this  further  reason  that  both 
creation  and  dissolution  are  spoken  of  by  accepting  Brahman 
directly  as  the  cause  in  the  text:  “All  these  beings  originate  from 
Space  (Brahman)  alone,  and  they  merge  by  proceeding  towards 
Space”  (Ch.  I.  ix.  1).  It  is  recognized  that  anything  from  which 
something  originates  and  in  which  it  merges,  must  be  its  mate¬ 
rial  cause,  as  for  instance,  earth  is  of  paddy,  barley,  etc.  By  the 
word  “directly”  the  aphorist  implies  that  the  text,  “Originates 
from  Space  alone”,  means  that  no  other  material  was  accepted. 


I.iv.  27] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


295 


And  a  product  is  not  seen  to  be  absorbed  into  anything  other 
than  its  material  cause. 

3TTc^:  IR^II 

Because  of  action  related  to  Itself  qftuiniRJ  by 
way  of  change  of  form. 

26.  (Brahman  is  the  material  cause)  because  of  action  related 
to  Itself  by  way  of  change  of  form. 

Brahman  is  the  material  cause  for  the  further  reason  that  in 
dealing  with  the  topic  of  Brahman,  it  is  shown  in  the  text,  “That 
created  Itself  by  Itself”  (Tai.  II.  vii),  that  the  Self  is  both  the 
object  and  the  subject — “Itself”  denoting  the  object,  and 
“created  by  Itself”  presenting  the  subject. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  can  a  pre-existing  entity,  standing 
there  as  the  agent  (of  some  action),  be  reduced  to  an  object 
that  is  being  produced? 

Vedantin  :  We  say  that  this  can  be  so  by  way  of  change  of 
form,  the  idea  being  that  the  Self,  pre-established  though  It  is, 
changed  Itself  into  a  special  form  as  the  Self  of  the  modifica¬ 
tions;  and  particular  changes  into  modified  things  are  in  evidence 
in  the  cases  of  such  material  causes  as  earth  etc.  The  use  of  the 
qualifying  phrase  “by  itself”  indicates  that  there  was  no 
dependence  on  any  other  cause.  (Or  the  second  word) 
parinctmat  may  be  an  independent  aphorism,  the  meaning  being 
this:  Brahman  is  not  the  material  cause  for  this  further  reason 
that  this  modification  of  Brahman  Itself  into  created  things 
is  mentioned  in  the  Upani§ad  by  using  the  same  case-ending 
after  Brahman  in,  “It  became  the  (elements) — gross  (earth, 
water,  fire)  and  subtle  (air,  space)”  etc.  (Tai.  II.  iii). 

fe  qfoflr  iR\9ii 

^  And  f|[  because  zftfa:  as  the  source  is  declared. 

27.  And  because  Brahman  is  declared  to  be  the  source  (yoni). 

Brahman  is  the  material  cause  for  this  additional  reason: 


296  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [I.iv.27 

Brahman  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad  as  the  source,  as  in, 
“ . . .  the  creator,  lord,  indwelling  soul,  Brahman,  the  source” 
(Mu.  III.  i.  3),  and  “the  source  of  all  beings  which  the  wise 
perceive”  (Mu.  I.  i.  3).  The  word  yoni  is  understood  in  the 
world  as  signifying  the  material  cause,  as  in,  “The  earth  is  the 
yoni  (source)  of  the  herbs  and  trees”.  The  female  organ  too 
(called  yoni)  is  a  material  cause  of  the  foetus  by  virtue  of  its 
constituent  (materials).  Sometimes  the  word  yoni  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  a  place,  as  in  “O  Indra,  I  have  placed  a  yoni  (seat) 
for  you”  (R.  V.  I.  civ.  1).  But  in  the  present  texts  (of  the 
Upani$ads),  yoni  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  material  cause, 
which  fact  becomes  clear  from  such  complementary  portions 
as,  “As  a  spider  projects  and  withdraws”  (Mu.  I.  i.  7),  and  so 
on.  Thus  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  Brahman  is  the  material 
cause.  As  for  the  argument  that  creation  after  deliberation  is 
seen  in  the  world  only  in  the  cases  of  such  efficient  causes  as 
the  potter  and  others,  but  not  in  the  case  of  materials,  that  is 
being  answered.  Any  argument  from  common  sense  is  not  appli¬ 
cable  here;  for  this  is  not  a  truth  to  be  arrived  at  through  infer¬ 
ence.  Rather,  it  being  known  from  the  Vedas  (alone),  its 
meaning  should  conform  to  Vedic  statements.  And  we  said  that 
the  Vedas  affirm  that  the  deliberating  God  is  the  material  cause 
as  well.  We  shall  expound  this  point  again  more  elaborately. 

Topic  8:  Explanation  of  Everything 

m  oJrpaTFTf  IR^II 

tt^T  Hereby  ^  all  (theories)  ozn^TRTT:  are  explained  oqn?HRH: 
explained. 

28.  Hereby  all  (other  theories  of  the  cause  of  the  universe) 
are  explained .  They  are  explained. 

Starting  with,  “Because  of  the  attribution  of  seeing,  the  one 
(i.  e.  Pradhana  of  the  Samkhyas)  which  has  not  been  taught  by 
the  Upani$ads  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe”  (B.  S.  I.  i.  5), 
the  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause  was  raised  and  refuted  again 
and  again  by  the  aphorisms  themselves.  This  was  so,  because 


I.iv.28]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  297 

in  the  Upani$ads  are  found  some  semblances  of  indicative  signs, 
which  appear  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  dull  intellect  as 
reinforcing  that  theory.  Inasmuch  as  that  theory  admits  the 
non-difference  of  the  cause  and  the  effect,  it  approaches  very 
near  to  the  Vedantic  theory,  and  it  has  been  drawn  upon  in 
their  own  texts  by  some  writers  like  Devala,  who  composed 
aphorisms  on  injunctions  and  prohibitions  (religious  duties  etc.). 
For  this  reason,  a  great  effort  was  made  for  repudiating  it,  and 
not  so  for  the  repudiation  of  the  theories  of  the  atom  etc.  as 
the  cause.  But  they  too  have  to  be  disproved,  since  they  are 
opposed  to  the  theory  of  Brahman  as  the  cause.  Some  Vedic 
indications  may  appear  in  the  eyes  of  the  people  of  poor  intel¬ 
lect  as  seemingly  confirming  those  views.  Hence  the  same  argu¬ 
ments  are  being  extended  to  them  on  the  analogy  of  defeating 
the  chief  wrestler.  “Hereby”,  by  the  arguments  refuting  the 
theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause,  “all  other  theories”  about  the 
atom  etc.  as  the  causes,  are  also  to  be  understood  as  “explained”, 
proved  to  be  fit  for  rejection;  for  they  too  are  not  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Vedas,  and  they  too  are  opposed  to  the  Vedas. 
The  repetition  of  “explained”  is  by  way  of  showing  the  end 
of  this  Part. 


CHAPTER  II 


AVIRODHA— NON-CONTRADICTION 
Section  I 

Topic  1:  Conflict  with  Smrti 

In  the  course  of  showing  how  all  the  Upanisadic  texts  are  in 
agreement  in  presenting  Brahman  (as  the  cause  of  the  universe), 
it  was  proved  in  the  First  Chapter  that  the  omniscient  Lord  of 
all  is  the  source  of  the  origin  of  the  universe,  just  as  clay,  gold, 
etc.  are  of  pots,  necklaces,  etc.;  that  by  virtue  of  His  being  the 
ordainer  of  the  created  universe,  like  the  magician  of  his  magic, 
He  is  the  cause  of  the  continuance  of  the  universe;  that  He  is 
the  cause  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  manifested  universe  into 
Himself,  like  the  earth  withdrawing  the  four  kinds  of  creatures; 
and  that  He  is  the  Self  of  us  all.  Moreover,  the  theories  that 
Pradhana  and  other  things  are  the  causes  were  demolished  on 
the  ground  of  being  un-Vedic.  Now  the  Second  Chapter  is  begun 
for  showing  that  the  Smftis  and  logic  are  not  antagonistic 
to  our  own  point  of  view;  that  the  theories  of  Pradhana  and  the 
rest  as  the  causes  are  based  only  on  a  semblance  of  logic; 
and  that  the  processes  of  creation  etc.  are  not  at  variance  in  the 
different  Upanisads.  Of  these  the  contradiction  with  the 
Smftis  is  presented  and  refuted  first. 

\\\\\ 

There  arises  the  defect  of  the 
(Samkhya)  Smrtis  being  left  without  any  scope  ^  if 
such  be  the  objection,  ^  not  so, 

for  (otherwise)  arises  the  defect  of  other  Smj*tis  being  left 
without  any  scope. 

1.  If  it  be  argued  (that  from  the  acceptance  of  Brahman  as 
the  cause  of  the  universe )  arises  the  defect  of  the  (Smhkhya) 


300  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.  1 

Smrtis  being  left  'without  any  scope ,  then  not  so,  for  otherwise 
will  cnise  the  defect  of  other  Smrtis  losing  their  scope. 

Opponent :  The  assertion  made  that  the  omniscient  Brahman 
is  the  cause  of  the  universe  is  untenable. 

Why? 

Because  that  is  tantamount  to  leaving  no  scope  for  the  Smrtis. 
The  Smrtis  are  the  scriptural  text  called  T antra,  written  by  the 
great  seer  (Kapila)  and  accepted  by  the  good  people,  and  also 
the  other  Smrtis  that  are  in  accord  with  them.  These  will  lose 
their  scope  on  the  acceptance  of  this  view.  For  in  them  the 
insentient  Pradhana  is  upheld  as  an  independent  cause.  As  for  the 
Smrtis  of  Manu  and  others,  they  retain  their  scope  in  so  far  as  they 
present  the  accessories  postulated  by  religious  rites  and  ceremonies 
like  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  etc.,  comprised  within  the  domain  of 
injunctions  and  prohibitions,  as  for  instance,  such  and  such  a 
caste  should  have  the  ceremony  of  investiture  with  the  sacred 
thread  at  such  a  time,  in  such  a  manner,  and  such  should  be  the 
mode  of  conduct,  such  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  such  the  return¬ 
ing  from  the  teacher’s  house  after  the  completion  of  the  study, 
and  such  the  marriage  with  a  woman  who  will  perform  the 
religious  rites  conjointly.  So  also  they  enjoin  many  kinds  of 
human  objectives  and  rites  and  duties  of  the  four  castes  and 
four  stages  of  life.  But  the  Smrtis  of  Kapila  and  others  have  no 
such  preoccupation  with  things  to  be  performed;  for  they  are 
composed  from  the  standpoint  of  the  fullest  insight  leading  to 
liberation.  If  they  are  left  without  scope  even  there,  they  will 
surely  become  useless.  Accordingly,  the  Upani$ads  have  to  be 
explained  without  contradicting  them. 

Objection  :  As  it  has  already  been  established  on  the  strength 
of  such  reasons  as  “seeing  (or  reflecting)”  that  the  purport  of 
the  Upanisads  is  that  the  omniscient  Brahman  is  the  cause  of 
the  universe,  why  is  it  again  called  into  question  under  the 
apprehension  of  the  defect  of  the  Smrtis  being  left  without  any 
scope? 

An  Explanation :  This  kind  of  acceptance  of  Vedanta  without 
any  question  may  be  quite  possible  for  people  of  independent 
intellect;  but  people  generally  depend  for  their  enlightenment 


Il.i.l]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA§YA  301 

on  the  scriptures  written  by  others.  Being  unable  to  comprehend 
the  meaning  of  the  Upani$ads  independently,  they  will  turn  to 
the  Smjtis  that  have  well-known  authors,  and  they  will  com¬ 
prehend  the  meaning  of  the  Upani$ads  with  their  help;  but  they 
will  not  rely  on  our  explanation,  since  the  authors  of  the  Smjtis 
command  great  respect.  Besides,  the  Smrtis  mention  that  Kapila 
and  others  had  the  (unobstructed  prophetic)  vision  of  seers. 
And  there  is  the  Upani$adic  text,  “(One  should  realize  that  God) 
who  saw  the  seer  Kapila  emerging  out  in  the  beginning  of 
creation  and  filled  him  with  knowledge  after  his  birth”  (Sv. 
V.  2).  Therefore  it  is  not  possible  to  make  their  view  appear 
false.  Moreover,  they  establish  their  interpretation  with  the 
help  of  logic.  Hence  from  this  point  of  view  also,  the  Upani$ads 
have  to  be  explained  with  the  help  of  the  Smrtis.  Hence  this 
objection  is  raised  again. 

Vedmtin  :  The  solution  of  that  difficulty  is  this:  “No,  because 
that  will  leave  other  Smrtis  without  scope.”  If  by  arguing  under 
the  fear  of  some  Smrtis  being  left  without  scope,  the  theory  of 
God  as  the  cause  be  set  at  naught,  then  other  Smrtis  speaking 
of  God  as  the  cause  will  be  left  without  any  scope.  We  shall 
quote  them:  After  commencing  about  the  supreme  Brahman 
with  the  words,  “That  which  is  that  subtle,  inscrutable  entity”, 
and  stating,  “for  He  is  called  the  indwelling  Self  of  all  beings, 
and  the  witness  of  the  bodies”,  it  is  declared,  “from  that  arose, 
O  best  among  the  Brahmanas,  the  Unmanifested,  possessed  of 
the  three  gunas ”.  Similarly,  it  is  said  elsewhere,  “O  Brahmaija, 
the  Unmanifested  gets  merged  in  the  attributeless  Puru$a”,  and 
“Therefore  hear  this  again  in  brief:  The  eternal  Narayana  is 
all  this.  At  the  time  of  creation,  He  projects  everything,  and 
eats  it  up  again  at  the  time  of  dissolution.”  These  are  statements 
in  the  Puranas.  In  the  Gita  also  occurs  this:  “I  am  the  origin 
and  dissolution  of  the  whole  universe”  (VII.  6).  And  Apastam- 
ba  has  this  with  regard  to  the  supreme  Self:  “All  things,  count¬ 
ing  from  space,  originate  from  Him;  He  is  changeless  and  He  is 
eternal”  ( Dhavmasutra .  I.  viii.  23.2).  Thus  in  the  Smrtis  also, 
God  is  revealed  in  quite  a  number  of  places  as  both  the  material 
and  efficient  cause.  The  reason  for  presenting  the  defect  of 
other  Smjtis  being  left  without  scope  is  this:  “With  the  help  of 


302  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  [II.  i.  1 

the  Smrtis,  we  shall  meet  the  arguments  of  those  who  take  their 
stand  on  the  Smrtis.”  It  was  shown  earlier  that  the  Upani$ads  have 
for  their  purport  God  as  the  cause.  In  a  case  of  conflict  among 
the  Smrtis  themselves,  when  it  become  incumbent  to  accept 
some  and  reject  others,  the  Smrtis  agreeing  with  the  Upanisads 
are  to  be  accepted  as  valid,  while  the  others  are  not  to  be  relied 
on.  Thus  it  has  been  said  in  the  course  of  determining  the 
validity  of  the  means  of  knowledge:  “When  a  Smrti  contradicts 
a  Vedic  text,  it  is  not  to  be  relied  on  (and  ought  to  be  rejected); 
for  a  Vedic  text  can  be  inferred  to  exist  as  the  basis  of  a  Smrti 
passage  only  when  there  is  no  such  contradiction”  (Jai.  Su.  I. 
iii.  3).  And  one  cannot  surmise  the  possibility  of  perceiving 
supersensuous  things  without  the  help  of  the  Vedas,  for  there 
is  no  ground  for  this. 

Opponent :  It  is  possible  for  Kapila  and  others  who  have 
attained  perfection  in  their  practices;  for  their  knowledge  is 
unobstructed. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  even  perfection  is  dependent  on  other 
things,  it  being  contingent  on  the  practice  of  virtue  etc.  And 
virtue  (and  vice)  are  indicated  by  injunction  (and  prohibition). 
Hence  the  meaning  of  an  injunction,  existing  even  earlier  (than 
anybody’s  perfection),  cannot  be  overridden  on  the  authority 
of  somebody’s  words  who  attains  perfection  subsequently. 
Besides,  even  if  it  be  fancied  that  we  have  to  rely  on  the  adepts, 
still  in  the  face  of  the  fact  that  perfected  beings  are  many,  in  a 
case  of  conflict  among  their  Smrtis,  there  is  no  other  means  of 
ascertaining  their  meanings  unless  it  be  by  an  appeal  to  the 
Vedas.  And  even  for  people  whose  intellects  are  dominated  by 
the  scriptures  of  others,  it  is  not  proper  to  entertain  a  bias  for 
any  particular  Smrti  without  question.  For  if  anybody  has  any 
bias  for  any  point  of  view,  then  since  the  power  of  under¬ 
standing  differs  from  man  to  man,  there  will  be  no  definiteness 
in  the  matter  of  the  ascertainment  of  Reality.  Accordingly, 
even  the  intellect  of  such  a  man  has  to  be  won  back  to  the 
proper  course  through  a  presentation  of  the  conflict  among  the 
Smrtis  and  a  consideration  of  their  agreement  or  disagreement 
with  the  Vedas.  As  for  the  allusion  to  the  Upanisadic  text  show¬ 
ing  the  excellence  of  the  wisdom  of  Kapila,  one  cannot  on  that 


II.  i.  1]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  303 

score  put  faith  on  any  view  of  Kapila  even  when  it  contradicts 
the  Vedas,  because  that  conclusion  has  for  its  basis  only  a 
similarity  of  the  name  Kapila,  and  because  another  Kapila, 
called  Vasudeva,  is  mentioned  in  the  Smpti,  who  burnt  away 
the  sons  of  Sagara.  Moreover,  a  passage  meant  for  imparting 
knowledge  of  one  thing  cannot  prove  the  existence  of 
something  else  (mentioned  casually),  unless  the  latter  has  some 
independent  basis.1  Besides,  there  is  a  Vedic  text  declaring  the 
greatness  of  Manu:  “Whatever  has  been  spoken  by  Manu  is  a 
curative  medicine”  (Tai.  Sa.  II.  ii.  10.2).  And  Manu  says,  “That 
sacrificer  to  the  Self,  who  sees  his  own  Self  equally  in  all  beings, 
and  all  beings  in  his  own  Self,  attains  independent  sovereignty” 
(XII.  91),  where  we  understand  that  he  eulogizes  the  vision  of 
everything  as  the  Self  and  thereby  condemns  the  (dualistic) 
view  of  Kapila.  For  Kapila  does  not  approve  the  realization  of 
everything  as  the  Self,  since  he  admits  a  multiplicity  of  souls. 
The  passage,  “O  Brahmana,  are  the  souls  many  or  one?”  in  the 
Mahabharata,  raises  a  discussion,  the  opponent’s  point  of  view 
being  stated  in  “O  king,  the  souls  are  many  according  to  those 
who  base  their  discussion  on  Samkhya  and  Yoga”.  Then  by 
way  of  demolishing  that  theory,  the  start  is  made  with  the 
passage,  “Just  as  the  same  earth  is  spoken  of  as  the  source  of 
many  human  forms,  so  also  I  shall  tell  you  of  that  cosmic  Person 
endowed  with  transcendental  qualities”.  And  lastly  omnipresence 
itself  is  established  in  the  passage:  “He  is  my  indwelling  Self  as 
well  as  yours;  He  is  the  witness  of  all  others  who  are  spoken  of 
as  associated  with  bodies;  but  He  is  not  perceived  by  anybody 
anywhere.  All  heads  are  His,  all  hands  are  His;  all  legs,  all  eyes, 
all  noses  are  His.  He  is  one,  but  moves  through  all  beings  at 
His  will.  He  is  blissful  and  free  from  sorrow”.  There  are  also 
Vedic  passages  about  the  Self  of  all,  as  for  instance,  “When  (at 
the  time  of  realization),  all  beings  become  the  Self  of  the 

*The  text,  “(One  should  realize  that  God)  who  saw  the  seer  Kapila 
emerging  out”  etc.  (Sv.  V.  2),  enjoins  the  realization  of  the  supreme  Self, 
so  that  the  mention  of  the  perception  of  the  omniscience  of  Kapila  is 
only  by  way  of  restating  a  fact  known  otherwise.  Now,  if  that  fact 
cannot  be  proved  on  some  independent  ground,  the  present  text,  which 
is  a  mere  reiteration  ( Anuvada ),  cannot  prove  it  either. 


304  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [II.  i.  1 

enlightened  man,  then  (during  that  state)  what  sorrow  can 
there  be  and  what  delusion  to  that  seer  of  non-duality ?”  (IS.  7). 
Hence  both  to  the  Vedas  and  the  teachings  of  Manu  which  fol¬ 
low  the  Vedas,  the  scripture  of  Kapila  is  antagonistic  not  only 
so  far  as  it  assumes  an  independent  Prakrti  (primordial  Nature), 
but  also  because  of  its  assumption  of  a  multiplicity  of  souls.  For 
the  Vedas  have  an  independent  authority  with  regard  to  what 
they  reveal  (within  their  own  province),  just  as  much  as  the 
sun  has  with  regard  to  its  colour,  whereas  the  authority  of  any 
human  being  is  remote,  since  it  depends  on  some  other  source 
of  knowledge  and  since  the  memory  of  the  speaker  intervenes. 
Hence  it  is  nothing  damaging  if  the  Smrtis  are  left  without  any 
application  in  matters  contradictory  to  the  Vedas. 

Why,  again,  it  constitutes  no  defect  to  leave  the  Smrtis  with¬ 
out  any  scope? 

ll^ll 

And  of  the  others  there  being  no 

perception. 

2.  And  (Pradhfina  is  not  the  cause)  since  the  others  are  not 
met  'with  (in  the  Vedas  and  common  experience). 

Categories,  other  than  Pradhana,  such  as  mahat  and  the  rest, 
which  are  assumed  in  the  Smrtis  as  the  derivatives  of  Pradhana, 
are  not  met  with  either  in  the  Vedas  or  in  common  experience. 
Of  these  the  elements  and  the  senses  can  have  a  place  in  the 
Smrtis,  since  they  are  well  known  in  the  world  and  the  Vedas. 
But  since  mahat  and  the  rest  are  unfamiliar,  like  the*  objects  of 
a  sixth  sense,  both  in  the  world  and  the  Vedas,  they  are  not  fit 
to  be  mentioned  in  the  Smrtis.  Even  though  words  appearing 
to  suggest  them  may  occur  occasionally  in  the  Vedas,  they  do 
not  really  bear  those  meanings,  as  it  was  explained  under  the 
aphorism,  “If  it  be  said  that  even  the  inferred  entity  is  revealed 
to  the  followers  of  some  recension”  (I.  iv.  1).  The  idea  implied 
is  that,  since  the  reference  to  the  derivatives  ( mahat  and  the 
rest)  is  invalid,  the  Smrti  referring  to  the  source  (Pradhana) 
must  be  equally  so.  From  this  point  of  view  also  there  can  be 


II.  i.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAgYA  305 

no  fault  arising  from  leaving  the  (Samkhya)  Smftis  without 
scope.  As  for  the  logical  validity  of  the  Samkhya  view,  it  will 
be  demolished  under  the  aphorisms  commencing  with,  “Brahman 
is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe,  since  the  world  is  of  a  different 
nature”  (II.  i.  4). 

Topic  2:  Refutation  of  Yoga 

qfo  11311 

qfo  Hereby  zffar:  Yoga  is  refuted. 

5.  Hereby  is  refuted  Yoga. 

The  arguments  under  the  last  topic  are  being  extended  here 
to  another  topic  by  saying  that  “hereby”,  by  the  repudiation  of 
the  Samkhya  Smjti,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  Yoga  Smjrti 
is  also  repudiated.  For  there  also,  in  contradiction  to  the  Vedas, 
occurs  the  assumption  of  Pradhana  as  an  independent  cause,  as 
also  of  its  derivatives,  mahctt  and  the  rest,  though  these  have  no 
place  in  common  experience  or  the  Vedas. 

Opponent :  If  that  be  so,  all  this  is  already  implied  in  the 
earlier  aphorism.  So  why  is  this  fresh  extension? 

Veddntin :  Because  an  additional  doubt  does  crop  up,  Yoga 
having  been  enjoined  in  the  Vedas  as  a  means  to  the  realization 
of  full  illumination,  as  in,  “The  Self  is  to  be  realized — to  be 
heard  of,  reflected  on,  and  profoundly  meditated  upon”  (Bj\ 
II.  iv.  5).  Moreover  in  the  Svetasvatara  Upani$ad  we  come 
across  an  elaborate  injunction  about  Yoga,  comprising  the 
arrangement  of  seat  and  the  rest,  which  commences  with  the 
verse,  “Holding  the  body  in  balance,  with  the  three  limbs 
(chest,  neck,  and  head)  erect”  (II.  8).  And  thousands  of  Vedic 
signs  indicative  of  Yoga  are  met  with,  as  in,  “The  holding  of 
the  senses  and  organs  unperturbed  and  under  control  is  called 
Yoga  by  the  adepts”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  11),  “Getting  fully  this 
knowledge  (of  Brahman)  and  the  process  of  Yoga”  (Ka.  II.  iii. 
18),  and  so  on.  In  the  philosophy  of  Yoga  also,  it  is  said,  “Now 
then,  starts  Yoga  which  is  a  means  to  the  realization  of  Reality”, 
where  it  is  admitted  as  a  means  to  complete  illumination.  So  a 
20 


306  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.  3 

portion  of  the  Yoga  Smjti  being  acceptable  to  either  side,  it 
cannot  be  discarded  just  as  much  as  the  Smjti  about  the 
Asfaka  ceremony  cannot  be.2  This  additional  doubt  is  also 
disposed  of  by  extending  the  application  of  the  previous  apho¬ 
rism.  Though  there  is  an  agreement  in  respect  of  a  portion  of 
the  subject-matter,  still  since  disagreement  is  in  evidence  in 
respect  of  others,  as  shown  above,  an  effort  is  being  made 
against  the  Samkhya  and  Yoga  Smptis  alone,  though  many 
Smjtis  dealing  with  spiritual  matters  are  extant.  For  the  Samkhya 
and  Yoga  are  well  recognized  in  the  world  as  means  for  the 
achievement  of  the  highest  human  goal  (liberation),  and  they 
are  accepted  by  the  good  people  and  are  supported  by  Vedic 
indicatory  marks,  as  in,  “One  becomes  freed  from  all  the 
bondages  after  realizing  the  Deity  that  is  the  source  of  these 
desires  and  is  attained  through  Samkhya  and  Yoga”.  Their  refuta¬ 
tion  centres  round  only  this  false  claim  that  liberation  can  be 
attained  through  Samkhya  knowledge  or  the  path  of  Yoga 
independently  of  the  Vedas.  For  the  Upani$ads  reject  the  claim 
that  there  can  be  anything  apart  from  the  Vedic  knowledge  of 
the  unity  of  the  Self  that  can  bring  about  liberation,  as  is  denied 
in,  “By  knowing  Him  alone,  one  goes  beyond  death.  There  is 
no  other  path  to  proceed  by”  (Sv.  III.  8).  But  the  followers  of 
Samkhya  and  Yoga  are  dualists,  and  they  do  not  perceive  the 
unity  of  the  Self. 

As  for  the  reference  to  realization  in  the  quotation,  “One 
becomes  freed  after  realizing  the  Deity  that  is  the  source  of  all 
desires  and  is  attained  through  Samkhya  and  Yoga”  (Sv.  VI.  13), 
the  Vedic  knowledge  and  meditation  are  there  referred  to  by 
the  words  Samkhya  and  Yoga3,  for  these  latter  have  an  affinity 
of  meaning  to  the  former.  This  is  how  it  is  to  be  understood. 
But  it  is  admitted  that  Samkhya  and  Yoga  have  their  applica- 

a  Astaka,  a  kind  of  obsequial  ceremony,  is  neither  mentioned  in  the 
Vedas  nor  prohibited  there.  So  it  is  inferred  that  since  the  Smrtis  are 
meant  for  the  followers  of  the  Vedas,  the  Smrti  enjoining  the  ceremony 
had  its  source  in  some  lost  Vedic  text.  Hence  it  is  undertaken  accordingly. 

3  Derivatively  Samkhya  means  full  knowledge,  and  Yoga  means  constant 
meditation  of  “I  am  Brahman”,  and  not  mere  “Stoppage  of  mental  trans¬ 
formations”,  as  Patanjali  says. 


n.i.4] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


307 


tion  so  far  as  those  features  are  concerned  which  are  not  antag¬ 
onistic  to  the  Vedas;  for  instance,  the  absolute  (qualityless) 
Puru§a  (infinite  conscious  Entity)  that  is  well  known  in  such 
Upani$adic  texts  as,  “For  this  infinite  Being  is  unattached’' 
(Br.  IV.  iii.  15),  is  accepted  by  the  Samkhyas  when  they  affirm 
that  their  puru$a  (individual  soul)  is  without  any  quality. 
Similarly  the  followers  of  Yoga,  when  instructing  about  the 
qualifications  of  monks  etc.,  subscribe  to  the  path  of  detach¬ 
ment  as  it  is  well  known  from  the  Upani§adic  text,  “Then  there 
is  the  monk  with  his  discoloured  (ochre)  cloth,  shaven  head, 
and  non-acceptance  of  all  gifts”  (Jabala,  5). 

Thus  also  are  to  be  refuted  all  the  Smjtis  of  the  Nyaya- 
Vaise$ika  schools. 

Opponent :  Through  inference  and  supporting  reason,  they 
too  are  conducive  to  the  knowledge  of  Reality. 

Vedantin :  Let  them  be  so  conducive.  But  the  knowledge  of 
Reality  springs  from  the  Upani$adic  texts  alone,  as  is  stated  in 
such  passages  as,  “One  who  is  not  versed  in  the  Vedas  cannot 
reflect  on  the  great  Entity”  (Tai.  Br.  III.  xii.  9.7).  “I  ask  you 
of  that  infinite  Being  known  only  from  the  Upani$ads”  (Br. 
III.  ix.  26). 


Topic  3:  Difference  in  Nature 

ST  IIYII 

(Brahman  is)  not  (the  cause),  owing  to  the 

dissimilarity  in  nature  °f  this  (universe);  ^  and 
the  fact  of  being  so  follows  from  the  Vedas. 

4.  Brahman  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe  owing  to  the 
dissimilarity  in  the  nature  of  this  universe;  and  the  fact  of  being 
so  is  known  from  the  Vedas. 

The  objection  to  the  view  that  Brahman  is  the  material  as 
well  as  efficient  cause  of  the  universe,  that  was  raised  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  Smrtis,  has  been  disposed  of.  Now  is  being 
met  the  objection  raised  from  the  standpoint  of  logic. 

Objection :  When  this  meaning  of  the  Vedas  has  once  been 


308  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.4 

ascertained,  how  can  there  be  any  scope  for  doubt  from  the 
standpoint  of  logic?  Are  not  the  Vedas  as  much  an  independent 
authority  about  Brahman  as  they  are  about  virtue  and  vice? 

Opponent :  Such  an  objection  could  have  been  raised,  if  like 
religious  rites  etc.,  that  have  to  be  accomplished,  the  subject- 
matter  here  had  to  be  known  from  the  Vedas  alone,  and  not 
from  any  other  source  of  knowledge.  But  Brahman  is  recognized 
as  an  entity  already  existing  (and  not  a  thing  to  be  accom¬ 
plished).  With  regard  to  an  existing  reality,  other  means  of 
knowledge  have  also  an  applicability,  as  for  instance  in  the  case 
of  the  earth  etc.  And  just  as  in  a  case  of  conflict  among  Vedic 
texts,  all  the  rest  are  made  to  conform  to  one,  so  also  when  the 
Vedic  texts  contradict  other  means  to  knowledge,  they  should 
be  made  to  conform  to  others.  Besides,  inference  is  nearer  to 
perception  inasmuch  as  it  presents  an  unknown  thing  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  characteristics  of  the  known,  whereas  the 
Vedic  passages  are  remote  from  perception  inasmuch  as  they 
present  their  subject-matters  on  the  basis  of  (dogmatic)  tradi¬ 
tion.  It  is  held  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  culminating  in 
personal  realization,  has  a  perceived  (or  tangible)  result  in 
the  form  of  removing  ignorance  and  leading  to  liberation.  The 
Upani$adic  text,  “The  Self  is  to  be  heard  of,  reflected  on”  (By. 
II.  iv.  5),  which  enjoins  reflection  over  and  above  hearing, 
shows  that  reasoning  is  also  to  be  given  due  consideration. 
Hence  the  doubt  is  again  preferred  from  the  standpoint  of  logic, 
by  saying,  “Brahman  is  not  the  cause  of  the  universe  owing  to 
the  dissimilarity  in  nature”.  The  assertion  made  that  conscious 
Brahman  is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  has  no  legs  to 
stand  on. 

Why? 

Because  this  product  is  dissimilar  to  the  material  cause.  For 
this  universe,  that  is  believed  to  be  a  product  of  Brahman,  is 
seen  to  be  different  in  nature  from  Brahman,  it  being  insentient 
and  impure,  whereas  Brahman  is  declared  in  the  Upani$ads  to 
be  dissimilar  in  nature  from  the  universe,  It  being  conscious 
and  holy.  It  is  not  a  matter  of  experience  that  things  differing 
in  nature  can  be  related  as  the  material  cause  and  its  effect.  For 
products  like  gold  necklace  etc.  cannot  have  clay  etc.  as  their 


II.  i.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  309 

material  cause,  nor  can  earthen  plates  etc.  have  gold  as  their 
material.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  clay  things  are  made  from  clay, 
and  gold  things  from  gold.  Similarly  this  universe — insentient, 
full  of  happiness,  misery,  and  delusion  as  it  is — must  be  the 
product  of  something  which  is  insentient  and  abounds  in  happi¬ 
ness,  misery,  and  delusion.  But  it  cannot  be  the  product  of 
Brahman  which  is  dissimilar.  That  the  universe  is  dissimilar  to 
Brahman  is  to  be  understood  from  noticing  the  former’s  insen¬ 
tience  and  impurity.  This  universe  is  impure  because  it  abounds 
with  happiness,  sorrow,  and  dejection,  and  as  a  result  leads  to 
enjoyment,  grief,  and  delusion  etc.,  and  it  remains  diversified 
into  such  high  and  low  states  as  heaven,  hell,  etc.  And  the 
universe  is  insentient,  since  it  is  admitted  to  be  serviceable  to 
the  sentient  (souls)  by  becoming  transformed  into  bodies  and 
senses.  There  can  be  no  action  and  reaction  in  the  form  of 
mutual  benefit  when  two  things  are  absolutely  equal,  for  two 
lamps  do  not  help  each  other. 

Objection  :  Though  the  body  and  organs  be  sentient,  they 
can  still  be  beneficial  to  the  experiencing  soul  on  the  analogy 
of  the  master  and  the  servant. 

Opponent :  Not  so,  for  even  in  the  case  of  the  master  and 
the  servant,  it  is  the  insentient  part  alone  that  is  beneficial  to  the 
sentient  (master).  Those  things  which  constitute  the  insentient 
appendages  of  the  one  sentient  being,  viz  the  intellect  and  the 
rest,  are  alone  serviceable  to  the  other  sentient  being.  But  one 
conscious  entity  does  not  by  itself  either  help  or  harm  another 
conscious  entity.  For  the  Samkhyas  are  of  opinion  that  the 
conscious  souls  are  devoid  of  degrees  of  perfection  and  imper¬ 
fection,  and  hence  they  are  not  the  agents  of  action.  Therefore 
the  bodies  and  organs  are  insentient.  Not  that  there  is  any 
proof  of  consciousness  residing  in  wood  or  lumps  of  earth.  This 
distinction  between  the  sentient  and  the  insentient  is  quite 
familiar  in  the  world.  Accordingly,  this  universe  cannot  have 
Brahman  as  its  material  cause,  for  it  is  different  from  Brahman  in 
nature. 

Objection :  Somebody  might  make  such  an  assertion:  Hearing 
from  the  Vedas  that  creation  has  Consciousness  as  its  material 
cause,  we  can  understand  on  the  strength  of  this,  that  the  whole 


3 10  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  [II.  i. 4 

universe  is  conscious,  for  the  characteristics  of  the  material  are 
seen  to  inhere  in  the  product.  The  non-perception  of  conscious¬ 
ness  is  caused  by  some  peculiarity  of  the  transformation.  Just 
as  the  sentience  of  the  souls,  which  is  a  patent  fact,  is  not  felt 
in  states  of  sleep,  unconsciousness,  etc.,  similarly  the  sentience  in 
wood,  lumps  of  earth,  etc.  can  remain  unmanifest.  And  on 
account  of  this  very  peculiarity  brought  about  by  manifesta¬ 
tion  or  non-manifestation  of  Consciousness,  and  on  account  of 
the  presence  or  absence  of  forms  etc.,  it  involves  no  contradic¬ 
tion  to  have  a  relationship  of  superiority  and  inferiority  between 
the  soul  and  the  assemblage  of  body  and  senses,  although  as 
Consciousness  they  are  the  same.  And  just  as  meat,  soup,  and 
rice,  which  are  equally  the  products  of  earth,  become  helpful 
to  one  another  (as  courses  of  food)  by  virtue  of  their  individ¬ 
ual  peculiarity,  similarly  it  can  be  here  as  well.  For  that  very 
reason  (of  distinction  created  by  expression  and  non-expression), 
the  well-known  division  between  the  sentient  and  the  insentient 
is  also  not  contradicted. 

Opponent :  In  this  way  also  the  well-known  division  between 
sentience  and  insentience  can  at  the  most  be  somehow  circum¬ 
vented;  but  even  so  the  distinction  between  the  holy  and  the 
unholy  cannot  be  explained  away.  Nor  can  the  other  dissimilar¬ 
ity  (shown  below)  be  really  reconciled.  This  is  stated  in,  “And 
that  fact  of  being  thus  different  is  known  from  the  Vedas.”  If 
sentience  for  everything,  even  though  this  fact  is  surely  un¬ 
known  in  this  world,  be  assumed  on  the  strength  of  the  Vedic 
declaration  that  Consciousness  is  the  material  cause  and  in 
accordance  with  people’s  reliance  on  the  Vedas,  then  that 
assumption  is  opposed  by  the  Vedas  themselves,  since  “the  fact 
of  being  so  (different)  is  known  from  the  Vedas”  as  well.  “The 
fact  of  being  so”  means,  “the  fact  of  being  different  from  the 
material  cause”.  In  the  passage,  “It  became  the  sentient  and  the 
insentient”  (Tai.  II.  vi.),  the  Vedas  themselves  apprise  us  of  the 
insentience  of  some  portion  and  thereby  let  us  know  that  the 
insentient  creation  is  different  from  Brahman. 

Objection:  Is  not  sentience  also  asserted  sometimes  by  the 
Upani$ads  for  the  elements  and  organs  which  are  considered  to 
be  insentient?  For  instance,  in  “Earth  said”,  “Water  said”  (S. 


n.i.5]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  311 

B.  VI.  i.  3.  2-4),  “That  Fire  deliberated”,  “That  Water  delib¬ 
erated”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3-4),  etc.,  we  come  across  Vedic  texts 
about  the  sentience  of  the  elements.  There  are  also  texts  about 
the  organs;  “Those  organs,  disputing  over  their  respective  great¬ 
ness,  went  to  Brahman”  (Br.  VI.  i.  7),  “They  said  to  the  organ 
of  speech,  ‘Chant  the  UdgTtha  for  us’  ”  (Br.  I.  iii.  2),  and  so  on. 
Opponent :  Hence  comes  the  answer: 


11*11 


^  But  grfaqrfir-oqH^:  the  reference  is  to  the  presiding  deities 
Owing  to  the  mention  of  distinction  and 

inherence. 


5.  But  this  is  only  a  reference  to  the  presiding  deities ,  because 
of  the  mention  of  distinction  (between  the  sentient  deities  and 
the  insentient  organs  and  elements)  and  the  inherence  (of  these 
deities  in  them). 

The  word  “but”  discards  the  objection.  It  is  not  to  be  assumed 
from  such  Vedic  passages  as  “Earth  said”,  that  the  elements  and 
organs  have  sentience,  since  this  is  only  a  reference  to  the 
presiding  deities — the  sentient  deities  identifying  themselves 
with  earth  etc.  and  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  being  referred  to 
as  engaged  in  activities  befitting  conscious  beings,  such  as 
talking  and  disputing  (or  quarrelling).  But  the  mere  organs  and 
elements  are  not  so  referred  to. 

How  can  this  be? 

“Because  of  the  mention  of  distinction  and  inherence.”  For 
the  distinction,  expressing  itself  as  a  division,  of  the  experiencing 
souls  and  the  elements  and  organs,  into  the  sentient  and  the 
insentient,  was  mentioned  earlier.  And  this  becomes  illogical  if 
everything  is  conscious.  Moreover,  with  a  view  to  obviating  any 
assumption  regarding  the  mere  organs  and  for  accepting  the 
presiding  deities,  the  followers  of  the  Kau$Itaki  recension 
qualify  them  by  the  word  deity  in  the  course  of  the  anecdote 
of  Prana  thus:  “In  days  of  yore,  these  deities,  while  disputing 
about  their  respective  supremacy”  (Kau.  II.  14),  and  “All  these 
deities,  coming  to  know  that  their  supremacy  was  in  the  keep- 


312  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [ILL  5 

ing  of  (i.e.  derived  from)  Prana”  (Kau.  II.  14).  Besides,  from 
mantras,  corroborative  statements,  anecdotes,  mythologies,  etc. 
it  is  known  that  the  sentient  presiding  deities  inhere  everywhere 
(in  the  elements  and  organs).  Such  texts  as,  “Fire  entered  into 
the  mouth  by  becoming  the  organ  of  speech”  (Ai.  I.  ii.  4), 
reveal  the  benevolent  presiding  deities  inhering  in  the  organs. 
In  the  subsequent  portion  of  the  text  also,  dealing  with  the 
anecdote  of  Prana ,  occurs  the  passage,  “Those  organs  approach¬ 
ed  their  father  Prajapati  and  said”  (Ch.  V.  i.  7),  where  we  meet 
with  such  behaviour  as  going  to  Prajapati  in  order  to  ascer¬ 
tain  their  supremacy,  the  understanding  of  the  supremacy 
of  Prana  by  following  a  process  of  agreement  and  difference, 
according  to  Prajapati’s  advice,  by  the  leaving  of  the  body  suc¬ 
cessively  and  the  carrying  of  presents  to  PrMa  (Bf.  VI.  i. 
13).  These  and  other  forms  of  behaviour  of  this  kind,  which 
are  seen  to  be  quite  like  ours,  confirm  the  view  that  the 
reference  is  to  the  presiding  deities.  It  is  to  be  understood  that 
in  the  text,  “That  Fire  deliberated”  also,  the  deliberation 
referred  to  belongs  to  the  supreme,  presiding  Deity  (Brahman) 
who  inheres  in  all  His  modifications  (viz  the  inferior  deities). 
Hence  this  creation  is  certainly  different  from  Brahman,  and 
being  different,  it  does  not  have  Brahman  as  the  material 
cause. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  objection  raised,  the  aphorist 
refutes  it: 


%\\\\\ 

6.  But  it  is  seen . 

The  word  “but”  rules  out  the  opponent’s  view.  The  assertion 
that  this  universe  does  not  have  Brahman  as  its  material  cause, 
since  its  characteristics  are  different,  is  not  wholly  true.  For  it 
is  a  matter  of  common  experience  that  from  a  man,  well-known 
as  a  conscious  being,  originate  hair,  nail,  etc.  that  are  different 
in  nature  (being  insentient),  and  scorpion  etc.  grow  in  cow- 
dung  etc.  known  to  be  insentient. 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  the  insentient  bodies  etc.  of 
men  and  others  are  the  sources  of  the  insentient  hair,  nails,  etc., 


ILL 6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  313 

and  the  insentient  bodies  of  scorpions  etc.  are  produced  from 
the  insentient  cow-dung  etc.? 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  is:  Even  so,  there  is  this 
difference  that  some  insentient  things  constitute  the  basis  for 
some  sentient  beings,  while  others  do  not.  Besides,  the  departure 
from  their  own  source  (by  hair,  nails,  etc.)  through  trans¬ 
formation  is  very  great  indeed,  since  human  bodies  and  hair, 
nails,  etc.  differ  in  appearance,  (size),  etc.  Similar  is  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  a  scorpion  etc.  and  cow-dung.  Had  they  been 
quite  similar,  the  very  conception  of  cause  and  effect  would 
have  vanished.  If,  however,  it  is  argued  that  some  characteristics, 
inherited  by  man  from  his  earthly  origin,  persist  in  the  hair 
and  nails  etc.,  and  so  also  those  of  cow-dung  etc.  persist  in 
the  scorpion  etc.,  then  in  that  case  the  characteristic  of  exist¬ 
ence,  belonging  to  Brahman,  is  seen  to  persist  in  space  etc.  And 
when  somebody  objects  to  the  theory  of  Brahman’s  being  the 
material  cause  of  the  universe  by  relying  on  the  act  of  dissim¬ 
ilarity,  he  has  to  explain  whether  the  dissimilarity  is  caused 
by  the  non-persistence  of  all  the  characteristics,  or  of  some 
one  of  them,  or  of  Consciousness.  From  the  first  standpoint  the 
whole  theory  of  the  material  cause  becoming  transformed  into 
the  effect  will  fall  through,  for  in  the  absence  of  some  distinctive 
feature  (in  the  effect)  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  the  modifi¬ 
cation  of  a  material  cause.  From  the  second  standpoint,  the 
objection  has  no  basis,  since  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the 
characteristic  of  existence,  belonging  to  Brahman,  is  seen  to 
inhere  in  all  things  counting  from  space.  From  the  third  stand¬ 
point,  there  is  an  absence  of  confirmatory  illustration,  for  what 
can  possibly  be  cited  against  the  believers  in  Brahman  by  saying, 
“Whatever  is  not  endowed  with  Consciousness  is  seen  to  be 
produced  from  something  other  than  Brahman”?  For  all  things 
are  held  by  us  to  have  Brahman  as  their  material  cause.  And  the 
contradiction  with  the  scriptures  is  quite  obvious,  for  it  has 
been  established  that  the  purport  of  the  scriptures  is  that 
Brahman  is  the  material  as  well  as  efficient  cause  of  the  uni¬ 
verse. 

As  for  the  argument  that  Brahman  being  an  existing  thing, 
other  means  of  knowledge  should  apply  to  It,  that  too  is  a  mere 


314  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [n.  i.  6 

figment  of  the  brain.  For  this  Entity  is  not  an  object  of  percep¬ 
tion,  It  being  devoid  of  form  etc.  And  It  is.  not  subject  to 
inference,  being  devoid  of  all  grounds  of  inference  etc. 
But  like  the  religious  acts  (producing  virtue),  this  entity  is 
known  from  the  scriptures  alone.  In  support  of  this  occurs 
the  Upani$adic  text,  ‘‘This  idea  about  Brahman  is  not  to 
be  induced  by  (independent)  logic.  O  dearest  one,  when 
imparted  by  some  (knower  of  Brahman)  who  is  other  than  the 
logician,  this  idea  becomes  conducive  to  realization”  (Ka.  I.  ii. 
9),  and  the  Vedic  text,  “Who  ever  knew  here  that  thing  directly 
from  which  this  diverse  creation  originated,  and  who  ever  spoke 
of  this  in  this  world?  The  gods  were  later  than  this  creation.  So 
how  can  anyone  know  that  from  which  creation  originated?” 
(11. V.  I.  xxx.  6).  These  two  verses  show  that  the  origin  of  the 
universe  is  inscrutable  even  to  the  perfected  lordly  (divine) 
beings.  There  is  also  the  Smjti  text:  “Entities  that  are  beyond 
thought  are  not  to  be  approached  through  logic.  The  definition 
of  the  unthinkable  is  that  which  is  beyond  nature”;  as  also  “The 
Self  is  said  to  be  unmanifested,  unthinkable,  and  unchangeable” 
(Gita,  II.  25),  “Neither  the  hosts  of  gods,  nor  the  great  r$is 
(seers)  know  My  origin,  for  in  every  way  I  am  the  source  of 
all  the  gods  and  the  great  r&”  (Gita,  X.  2),  and  similar  other 
passages. 

It  was  also  argued  that  by  enjoining  “reflection”  over  and 
above  “hearing”,  the  (Bfhadaraoyaka)  Upani$ad  shows  that  logic 
also  is  to  be  honoured.  But  through  such  a  subterfuge,  empty 
logic  cannot  find  any  scope  here;  for  logic,  conforming  to  the 
Upani$ads,  is  alone  resorted  to  here  as  a  subsidiary  means  help¬ 
ing  realization.  And  this  is  of  this  kind:  Since  the  states  of  sleep 
and  wakefulness  contradict  each  other,  the  Self  is  not  identified 
with  any  one  of  them;  since  the  individual  soul  dissociates  itself 
from  the  world  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep  to  become  one  with 
the  Self  which  is  Existence,  it  must  be  the  same  as  the  tran¬ 
scendental  Self;  since  creation  has  originated  from  Brahman,  and 
since  the  law  is  that  the  cause  and  effect  are  non-different, 
creation  must  be  non-different  from  Brahman;  and  so  on.  The 
aphorism,  “Because  reasoning  has  no  conclusiveness,  (it  cannot 


n.i.7]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  315 

upset  the  conclusions  of  Vedanta)”  (II.  i.  11)  will  show  that 
independent  reasoning  is  misleading. 

And  it  was  pointed  out  that  in  accordance  with  the  Vedic 
declaration  that  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  is  conscious, 
the  pseudo-Vedantist  concludes  that  the  whole  of  creation  is 
conscious.  Still  we  say  that  even  from  his  standpoint,  the  text, 
“It  became  the  sentient  and  insentient”  (Tai.  II.  vi.),  which 
speaks  of  the  division  between  the  conscious  and  the  uncon¬ 
scious,  can  surely  be  reconciled  on  the  basis  of  the  manifestation 
or  non-manifestation  of  Consciousness.  It  is  rather  from  the 
standpoint  of  the  other  party  (i.e.  the  Samkhyas)  alone,  that 
even  this  Vedic  mention  of  division  becomes  irreconcilable. 

How? 

Because  here  the  Upani$ad  reveals  the  presence  of  the  supreme 
Cause  in  the  whole  of  creation  by  saying,  “It  became  the  sen¬ 
tient  and  the  insentient”.  On  the  basis  of  this  text,  just  as  it  can 
be  argued  on  the  one  hand  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  sentient 
to  become  insentient  owing  to  dissimilarity,  so  also  it  can  be 
argued  on  the  other,  that  the  insentient  (Pradhana)  cannot 
become  the  sentient  creatures.  As,  however,  the  dissimilarity 
(between  Brahman  and  creation)  has  already  been  explained 
away  (with  the  help  of  such  illustrations  as  cow-dung  and 
scorpion),  therefore  a  conscious  cause  is  to  be  accepted  just  as 
it  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ads. 

ini 

(The  effect  is)  non-existent  ^  if  this  be  the 

contention,  ^  not  so;  it  being  a  mere  negation. 

7.  If  it  be  said  that  the  effect  (in  that  case)  is  non-existent 
(before  creation) ,  then  not  so;  for  it  is  merely  a  negation 
(' without  any  object  to  deny). 

Opponent :  If  Brahman,  that  is  conscious,  pure,  and  free  from 
sound  etc.,  be  accepted  as  the  cause  of  the  effect  that  is  opposed 
to  It,  being  unconscious,  impure,  and  possessed  of  sound  etc., 
then  it  comes  to  this  that  the  effect  was  non-existent  before 


316  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  7 

creation.  And  that  conclusion  is  undesirable  for  you  (Vedantins) 
who  believe  in  the  pre-existence  of  the  effect  (in  the  cause). 

Vedantin :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  for  yours  is  a  denial 
without  any  object  to  deny.  This  denial  cannot  amount  to  a 
rejection  of  the  existence  of  the  effect  before  creation. 

How? 

Because  it  can  be  understood  that  even  as  today,  the  effect 
(universe)  has  existence  only  in  identity  with  its  material  cause 
(Existence-Brahman),  so  it  had  its  existence  in  that  very  way 
even  before  creation.  For  even  now,  this  creation  does  not  exist 
independently  of  the  Self  that  is  its  material  source,  as  is  shown 
in  the  Upani$adic  text,  “All  ousts  one  who  knows  it  as  different 
from  the  Self’  etc.  (Bj.  II.  iv.  6).  But  the  existence  of  the 
product  as  the  cause  before  creation  is  in  an  indistinguishable 
form. 

Opponent :  Is  not  Brahman,  the  (alleged)  source  of  the  world, 
devoid  of  sound  etc.? 

Vedantin  :  True;  but  the  effect,  possessed  of  sound  etc.,  does 
not  certainly  exist  separately  from  its  Self,  the  material  cause, 
either  before  creation  or  now.  Thus  it  cannot  be  said  that  the 
effect  is  non-existent  before  its  creation.  We  shall  speak  about 
this  elaborately  when  dealing  with  the  non-difference  of  the 
cause  and  effect  (B.S.  II.  i.  14). 


apfaft  In  dissolution  owing  to  the  predicament 

of  becoming  just  like  that  it  becomes  incongruous. 

8.  Since  in  dissolution  there  is  the  predicament  of  the  cause 
becoming  just  like  that  effect ,  therefore  this  ( theory  that 
Brahman  is  the  material  cause)  becomes  incongruous . 

To  this  the  opponent  makes  this  rejoinder.  If  it  be  admitted 
that  this  creation,  possessed  of  grossness,  parts,  insentience,  limi¬ 
tation,  impurity,  etc.,  has  Brahman  as  Its  material  cause,  then 
during  merger,  i.e.  dissolution,  when  the  course  of  creation  is 
reversed  and  the  effect  becomes  indistinguishable  from  the 
cause,  it  will  taint  the  cause  with  its  own  attributes.  Thus  since 


II.  i.  9] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


317 


in  this  way  arises  the  possibility  of  Brahman’s  becoming  tainted 
during  dissolution  by  the  impurities  etc.  of  creation,  the  Upani- 
$adic  view  that  the  omniscient  Brahman  is  the  material  cause 
of  the  universe  is  incongruous.  There  is  also  another  absurdity. 
When  all  differences  become  obliterated,  there  will  be  no 
possibility  of  a  re-emergence  with  a  division  between  the  experi- 
encers  and  the  objects  of  experience,  since  there  can  be  no 
fixity  of  rules  to  guide  the  new  creation.  Besides,  there  will  be 
this  impropriety:  If  it  be  admitted  that  the  experiencing  souls 
can  be  reborn  after  they  have  become  unified  with  supreme 
Brahman  during  dissolution  when  even  the  results  of  their  past 
actions  become  obliterated,  then  there  will  arise  the  possibility 
of  even  the  free  souls  being  reborn.  If  on  the  contrary  it  be 
held  that  even  in  dissolution  this  world  maintains  its  distinction 
from  the  supreme  Brahman,  then  there  will  be  no  possibility 
of  dissolution;  and  yet  there  can  be  no  effect  that  is  non- 
different  from  the  cause.  In  this  way  this  is  all  inconsistent  to 
be  sure. 


Il5.ll 

^  But  q-  not  so  owing  to  the  existence  of 

supporting  illustration. 

9 .  But  that  cannot  be  so  on  account  of  the  existence  of  sup - 
porting  illustration . 

Vedantin :  The  answer  here  is:  There  is  certainly  nothing 
incongruous  in  our  point  of  view.  As  for  the  argument  that 
when  the  effect  merges  in  the  cause,  it  will  tarnish  the  cause 
with  its  own  drawbacks,  that  is  unacceptable. 

Why? 

For  there  are  illustrations  to  substantiate  this;  there  are 
illustrations  to  show  that  even  though  the  effects  merge  in  their 
causes,  they  do  not  pollute  the  latter  with  their  own  peculiarities. 
For  instance,  such  products  as  plates  etc.,  fashioned  out  of  the 
material  earth,  have  the  peculiarities  of  being  high,  medium,  and 
flat  during  their  separate  existence;  but  when  they  become 
re-absorbed  into  their  original  substance,  they  do  not  transfer 


318  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [II.  i.  9 

their  individual  features  to  it.  Nor  do  such  products  as  necklaces 
etc.,  fashioned  out  of  gold,  transfer  their  individual  peculiarities 
to  gold  during  their  merger  into  it.  The  host  of  living  creatures 
of  four  classes,  emerging  from  earth,  do  not  transmit  their  indi¬ 
vidual  characteristics  to  the  earth  during  their  absorption  into 
it.  But  there  is  no  such  illustration  in  support  of  your  point  of 
view.  Resorption  itself  will  be  an  impossibility  if  the  effect 
should  persist  in  the  cause  together  with  its  peculiarities.  And 
though  cause  and  effect  are  non-different,  the  effect  has  the 
nature  of  that  cause  and  not  vice  versa,  which  fact  we  shall 
state  under  the  aphorism,  “The  non-difference  of  the  effect 
from  the  cause  is  known  from  words  like  ‘origin’  ”  (II.  i.  14). 
And  your  argument  that  the  effect  will  pollute  the  cause  during 
resorption  does  not  go  very  far;  for  the  position  is  the  same 
even  during  the  state  of  continuance  (of  creation),  since  the 
cause  and  effect  are  admitted  to  be  non-different.  The  effect  is 
recognized  to  be  equally  non-different  from  the  cause  during 
all  the  three  periods  of  time  according  to  the  Upani$adic  texts 
like  the  following:  “.  ..and  this  all  are  the  Self’  (Bj\  II.  iv.  6), 
“All  this  is  but  the  Self’  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2),  “All  this  that  is  in 
front  is  but  Brahman,  the  immortal”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11),  “All  this 
is  certainly  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1).  The  way  that  the  objec¬ 
tion  has  to  be  met  there  (during  continuance)  by  holding  that 
the  cause  is  not  affected  by  the  product  and  its  characteristics, 
these  being  superimposed  on  the  cause  by  nescience,  is  equally 
to  be  followed  in  the  case  of  dissolution  as  well.  Moreover,  there 
are  parallel  instances.  As  a  magician  himself  is  not  affected  at 
any  time — past,  present,  or  future — by  the  magic  conjured  up 
by  himself,  it  being  unreal,  so  also  the  supreme  Self  is  not 
affected  by  this  world  which  is  a  delusion.  As  a  dreamer, 
remaining  the  same  under  all  conditions,  is  not  affected  by  the 
delusion  of  dreaming,  just  because  that  delusion  does  not  persist 
in  him  during  the  states  of  wakefulness  and  sleep,  so  also  the 
witness  of  the  three  states,  who  ever  remains  the  same,  is  not 
touched  by  the  three  variable  states.  This  appearance  of  the 
supreme  Self  in  identity  with  the  three  states  is  a  mere  super¬ 
imposition,  as  in  the  case  of  the  rope  appearing  as  a  snake  etc. 
With  regard  to  this  it  is  said  by  the  teacher  Gautjapada,  versed 


II.  i.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  319 

in  the  traditional  views  of  Vedanta,  “When  the  individual  sleep¬ 
ing  under  the  influence  of  beginningless  Maya  is  awakened, 
then  he  realizes  the  birthless,  sleepless,  dreamless,  non-dual 
( tuny  a )”  (Ma.  Ka.  I.  16).  Thus  the  objection  that  was  raised 
that  in  resorption,  the  cause,  like  the  effect  will  be  open  to  the 
defects  of  grossness  etc.,  has  no  validity. 

And  it  was  pointed  out  that  if  all  distinctions  are  obliterated 
during  resorption  there  will  be  no  reasonable  ground  regulating 
the  re-emergence  of  creation  with  the  usual  differences.  That 
too  is  untenable  for  the  very  reason  that  there  is  a  supporting 
illustration.  As  in  natural  slumber  and  samadhi  (absorption  in 
divine  consciousness),  though  there  is  a  natural  eradication  of 
differences,  still  owing  to  the  persistence  of  the  unreal  nescience, 
differences  occur  over  again  when  one  wakes  up,  similarly  it 
can  also  happen  here.  Bearing  on  this  is  the  Upani$adic  text,  “All 
these  beings,  when  they  become  one  with  Existence  (during 
sleep),  do  not  know,  ‘We  have  become  one  with  Existence’. 
Whatever  they  might  have  been  here — tiger,  lion,  wolf,  pig, 
worm,  butterfly,  gnat,  or  mosquito — they  become  so  over  again 
(after  returning)”  (Ch.  VI.  ix.  3).  As  during  the  state  of  the 
continuance  of  the  world,  it  is  seen  that  like  dream,  there  are 
empirical  differentiations  under  the  influence  of  unreal  igno¬ 
rance,  despite  the  existence  of  the  supreme  Self  as  an  undifferen¬ 
tiated  entity,  so  also  we  can  infer  that  even  in  dissolution,  a 
power  of  diversification,  possessed  by  unreal  nescience,  persists, 
Hereby  is  answered  the  objection  that  free  souls  may  become 
subjected  to  rebirth.  For  (in  their  cases)  unreal  nescience  stands 
eradicated  by  full  illumination.  And  the  other  objection  that 
was  implied  at  the  end  that  even  in  dissolution  the  universe  will 
continue  in  the  supreme  Brahman  with  all  its  diversification,  that 
too  is  dismissed  by  the  non-admission  of  such  a  position.  Hence 
this  view  of  the  Upani$ads  is  quite  logical. 

FFKRtara  ii$°ii 

^  And  owing  to  (your)  own  point  of  view 

being  open  to  defects. 

10.  And  because  the  defects  cling  to  your  own  point  of  view. 


320  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  10 

Besides,  these  defects  will  crop  up  equally  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  our  opponent. 

How? 

The  answer  is:  The  objection  advanced  that  this  universe 
cannot  have  Brahman  as  its  material  cause  on  account  of  its 
dissimilarity  is  applicable  equally  against  the  theory  of  Pradhana 
as  the  material  cause;  for  it  is  admitted  (by  the  Samkhyas)  that 
the  universe  of  sound  etc.  springs  out  of  Pradhana  which  is 
devoid  of  sound  etc.  So  from  the  admission  of  the  origin  of  a 
dissimilar  effect,  the  defect  of  the  product  having  no  previous 
existence  persists  equally.  Similarly  from  the  admission  (by 
the  Samkhyas)  of  the  non-difference  of  the  effect  from  the 
cause  during  dissolution,  the  defect  arising  from  such  a  position 
is  equally  applicable.  Again,  when  during  dissolution  the  effects 
are  divested  of  all  their  peculiarities  and  they  become  non- 
differentiated,  then  the  differences  that  could  have  been  distin¬ 
guished  individually  before  dissolution,  by  saying  that  such  and 
such  a  material  created  such  and  such  a  person,  and  such  and 
such  a  material  created  that  other,  cannot  be  so  determined  at 
the  time  of  a  new  creation;  for  there  is  no  such  regulating  basis 
for  this.  And  even  if  in  the  absence  of  any  basis,  a  regularity  in 
the  recurrence  (of  difference)  be  maintained,  then  the  absence 
of  a  basis  being  the  same,  such  a  theory  may  lead  to  the  rebirth 
of  a  free  soul  as  well.  If,  again,  it  be  argued  that  some  distinctive 
features  become  effaced  during  resorption  while  others  are  not, 
then  those  that  do  not  part  with  their  peculiarities  will  not  be 
the  products  of  Pradhana.  These  defects  being  thus  equally 
shared,  they  are  not  to  be  hurled  at  either  point  of  view.  Thus 
this  merely  strengthens  the  faultlessness  of  the  Vedantic  stand¬ 
point,  which  has  to  be  accepted  in  any  case. 


o 


nun 


Owing  to  the  inconclusiveness  of  reasoning 
grfq  also  spspqr  in  a  different  way  it  has  to  be  reasoned 

if  it  be  argued  thus,  xra^  arfq  even  so, 
there  will  be  no  getting  away  (from  the  defect). 


1L  If  it  be  argued  that  although  reasoning  is  inconclusive, 


321 


n.  i.  11  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 

still  it  has  to  be  done  in  a  different  way,  (so  as  to  avoid  this 
deject )y  then  even  so  there  will  be  no  getting  away  from  the 
defect . 

For  this  further  reason,  one  should  not  on  the  strength  of 
mere  logic  challenge  something  that  has  to  be  known  from  the 
Vedas.  For  reasoning,  that  has  no  Vedic  foundation  and  springs 
from  the  mere  imagination  of  persons,  lacks  conclusiveness.  For 
man’s  conjecture  has  no  limits.  Thus  it  is  seen  that  an  argument 
discovered  by  adepts  with  great  effort  is  falsified  by  other 
adepts;  and  an  argument  hit  upon  by  the  latter  is  proved  to  be 
hollow  by  still  others.  So  nobody  can  rely  on  any  argument  as 
conclusive,  for  human  intellect  differs.  If,  however,  the  reason¬ 
ing  of  somebody  having  wide  fame,  say  for  instance,  Kapila  or 
someone  else,  be  relied  on  under  the  belief  that  this  must  be 
conclusive,  even  so  it  surely  remains  inconclusive,  inasmuch  as 
people,  whose  greatness  is  well  recognized  and  who  are  the 
initiators  of  scriptures  (or  schools  of  thought) — for  instance, 
Kapila,  Kaijada,  and  others — are  seen  to  hold  divergent  views. 

If,  again,  it  be  said  (by  the  opponent ):  “We  shall  infer  in 
some  other  way,  so  that  no  defect  of  inconclusiveness  can  arise. 
It  cannot  certainly  be  asserted  that  there  can  be  no  conclusive 
argument  whatsoever;  for  even  this  inconclusiveness  of  reason¬ 
ing  is  established  by  reasoning  itself.  For  by  noticing  that  some 
reasonings  are  inconclusive,  it  is  concluded  that  others  of  the 
same  class  must  be  so.  Moreover,  on  the  assumption  that  all 
reasonings  are  inconclusive,  all  human  dealings  will  be  upset. 
It  is  noticed  that  people  wishing  to  get  happiness  or  avoid  misery 
pursue  future  courses  on  the  analogy  of  the  past  and  present 
courses.  And  when  there  is  any  divergence  as  regards  interpre¬ 
tation  of  Vedic  passages,  it  is  through  reasoning,  meant  for  the 
determination  of  the  meaning  of  sentences,  that  false  interpreta¬ 
tions  are  discarded  and  the  proper  import  is  determined.  Manu 
is  also  of  the  same  opinion  when  he  says,  ‘One  who  would 
extricate  virtue  from  vice,  should  fully  master  three  things — 
direct  perception,  inference,  and  scriptures  that  have  come 
down  through  different  traditions’  (XII.  105),  and  ‘He,  and 
nobody  else,  knows  virtue  and  vice  who  seeks  to  understand 
21 


322 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  i.  11 


the  teachings  about  virtue  and  vice,  imparted  by  the  sages, 
with  the  help  of  reasoning  that  does  not  run  counter  to  Vedic 
literature’  (XII.  106).  This  in  fact  constitutes  a  recommenda¬ 
tion  for  reasoning  that  it  is  thought  to  be  inconclusive  (i.e.  not 
dogmatic),  for  it  is  thus  that  one  has  to  discard  faulty  reasoning 
and  resort  to  the  faultless  one.  There  is  no  sense  in  being  a  fool 
just  because  one’s  forefathers  were  so.  Hence  the  assertion  that 
reasoning  has  no  finality  creates  no  real  difficulty.” 

To  this  (we  Vedantins  say):  “Even  so  there  is  no  getting  away 
from  the  defect.”  Although  reasoning  may  be  noticed  to  have 
finality  in  some  contexts,  still  in  the  present  context  it  cannot 
possibly  get  any  immunity  from  the  charge  of  being  incon¬ 
clusive;  for  this  extremely  sublime  subject-matter,  concerned 
with  the  reality  of  the  cause  of  the  Universe  and  leading  to 
the  goal  of  liberation,  cannot  even  be  guessed  without  the  help 
of  the  Vedas.  And  we  said  that  It  cannot  be  known  either 
through  perception,  being  devoid  of  form  etc.,  or  through 
inference  etc.,  being  devoid  of  the  grounds  of  inference  etc. 

Besides,  (taking  avimoksa  to  mean  “absence  of  liberation”), 
it  is  the  accepted  view  of  all  who  stand  by  liberation  that  free¬ 
dom  from  bondage  comes  from  true  illumination.  And  that  true 
enlightenment  has  no  diversity,  since  its  content  is  the  thing- 
in-itself.  That  content  of  knowledge  is  said  to  be  the  most 
real  since  it  ever  remains  the  same;  and  in  the  world,  the 
knowledge  of  that  kind  is  said  to  be  right  knowledge,  as  for 
instance,  the  knowledge  about  fire  that  it  is  hot.  This  being  the 
case,  people  should  have  no  divergence  when  they  have  true 
knowledge,  whereas  the  difference  among  people  whose  know¬ 
ledge  is  based  on  reasoning  is  well  known  from  their  mutual 
opposition.  For  it  is  a  patent  fact  of  experience,  that  when  a 
logician  asserts,  “This  indeed  is  the  true  knowledge”,  it  is 
upset  by  somebody  else.  And  what  is  established  by  the  latter 
is  disproved  by  still  another.  How  can  any  knowledge,  arising 
from  reasoning,  be  correct,  when  its  content  has  no  fixity  of 
form?  Again,  the  follower  of  the  theory  of  Pradhana  is  not 
accepted  by  all  logicians  as  the  best  among  adepts  in  reasoning, 
in  which  opposite  case  alone  could  his  knowledge  be  accepted  by 
us  as  right  knowledge.  It  is  not  also  possible  to  assemble  all  the 


H.i.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  323 

logicians  of  past,  present,  and  future  at  the  same  place  and  time, 
whereby  to  arrive  at  a  single  idea,  having  the  same  form  and 
content,  so  as  to  be  the  right  knowledge.  But  since  the  Vedas 
are  eternal  and  a  source  of  knowledge,  they  can  reasonably 
reveal  as  their  subject-matter  something  which  is  (well  estab¬ 
lished  and)  unchanging;  and  the  knowledge  arising  from  them 
can  be  true,  so  that  no  logician,  past,  present,  or  future  can 
deny  it.  Hence  it  is  proved  that  the  knowledge  arising  from 
the  Upanisads  is  alone  the  true  knowledge.  And  since  there 
can  be  no  other  source  of  true  knowledge,  ( avimoksaprasangah ) 
“there  will  arise  the  possibility  of  liberation  being  ruled  out”.  So 
the  conclusion  stands  firm  that  in  accordance  with  the  Vedas 
and  reasoning  conforming  to  the  Vedas,  conscious  Brahman  is 
the  material  and  efficient  cause  of  the  universe. 

Topic  4:  Non-acceptance  by  the  Wise 

fjtrerqfa^T  srfa  \\V(\\ 

tt^t  Hereby  the  views  not  accepted  by  the 

wise  srfq-  also  ozn^TcTT:  are  explained. 

12.  Hereby  are  explained  all  the  (other)  theories  that 
are  not  accepted  by  the  'wise. 

As  the  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  material  cause  of  the 
universe  approximates  to  the  Vedantic  philosophy;  as  it  is  sup¬ 
ported  by  plausible  reasons;  and  as  it  is  accepted  by  some  good 
followers  of  the  Vedas,  therefore  the  objection  has  been 
demolished  that  could  be  raised  against  the  Upanisadic  passages 
on  the  strength  of  the  logit  based  on  that  theory.  Now,  some 
people  of  dull  intellect  raise  certain  objections  against  the 
Upanisadic  passages  on  the  strength  of  logic  based  on  the  views 
that  the  atoms  etc.  are  the  material  causes.  Hence  the  arguments 
advanced  earlier  are  being  extended  here  on  the  analogy  of 
defeating  the  chief  wrestler. 

Those  views  that  are  accepted  are  parigrahah\  those  that 
are  not  accepted  are  aparigrahah.  Those  unacceptable  to  the 
wise  are  sisfa-aparigrahah.  “Hereby”,  by  the  reasons  advanced 


324 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[n.i.  12 


or  refuting  the  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause;  it  is  to  be 
understood  that  the  theories  of  atoms  etc.  as  the  causes,  which 
are  not  accepted  even  partially  by  wise  people  like  Manu, 
Vyasa,  and  others,  “are  also  explained”  as  not  to  be  accepted; 
they  are  to  be  understood  as  having  been  repudiated.  The 
reasons  for  the  refutation  being  the  same,  there  can  be  no 
room  for  anything  else  that  can  be  doubted.  The  reasons  in 
support  of  the  refutation — viz  that  the  supreme  cause  of  the 
universe  is  beyond  the  ken  of  logic,  that  reasoning  is  incon¬ 
clusive,  that  even  if  inference  be  applied  otherwise,  it  cannot 
get  out  of  the  difficulty,  that  there  is  contradiction  with  the 
Vedas,  and  so  on — are  equally  applicable  here. 

Topic  5:  Brahman  Becoming  an  Experiencer 


From  the  fact  of  (objects)  becoming  the  experi¬ 
encing  soul  arfeqHl:  distinctions  will  cease  ^  if  such  be  the 
contention  it  can  well  exist  as  seen  in  common 

experience. 

13.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  distinction  between  the  experiencer 
(of  happiness  and  sorrow)  and  the  things  experienced  will  cease 
when  the  (experienced)  objects  turn  into  the  experiencer ,  then 
we  say  that  such  a  distinction  can  well  exist  as  observed  in 
common  experience. 

Opponent :  The  view  that  Brahman  is  the  cause  is  being 
controverted  again  with  the  help  of  reasoning  from  another 
point  of  view.  Although  the  Vedas  are  a  valid  means  of 
knowledge  within  their  own  domain,  still  when  they  contra¬ 
dict  some  fact  known  through  other  means,  they  must  be 
interpreted  otherwise  (in  a  secondary  sense),  as  for  instance,  in 
the  case  of  the  mantras  and  corroborative  statements.  Even 
reasoning  wall  be  fallacious  when  it  oversteps  into  fields  that 
are  not  its  own,  such  as  the  fields  of  virtue  and  vice. 

What  follows  if  it  be  so? 

From  this  it  follows  that  it  is  illogical  that  the  Vedas  should 


n.i.  13]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  325 

overrule  something  well  ascertained  through  some  other  means 
of  knowledge. 

How  again  do  the  Vedas  deny  what  is  well  established  by 
other  means  of  proof? 

Apropos  of  this  it  is  said  that  the  division  between  the  experi- 
encer  and  the  things  experienced  is  quite  familiar  in  this  world 
— the  experiencer  ( bhoktd )  being  the  conscious  embodied  soul, 
and  sound  etc.  being  the  objects  experienced  ( bhogya ).  For 
instance,  Devadatta  is  the  experiencfer  (enjoyer)  and  food  is 
the  thing  experienced  (enjoyed).  That  division  will  be  nullified 
if  the  experiencer  should  become  the  things  experienced  and  vice 
versa.  Yet  this  interchange  of  position  between  them  will  result 
from  the  assumption  of  their  non-difference  from  Brahman,  the 
supreme  cause.  But  this  well-known  division  should  not  be 
effaced.  On  the  contrary,  on  the  analogy  of  the  division 
between  the  experiencer  and  things  experienced,  as  it  exists  now, 
the  inference  should  be  that  the  same  was  and  will  be  the  case  in 
the  past  and  the  future.  Accordingly,  the  assertion  of  Brahman 
as  the  material  cause  is  improper,  for  it  leads  to  a  denial  of  the 
well-known  division  between  the  experiencer  and  the  thing 
experienced. 

Vedantin :  Should  anyone  raise  such  an  objection,  the  answer 
to  him  will  be:  Such  a  distinction  may  well  exist  just  as  it  is  in 
common  experience.  This  division  can  be  upheld  from  our  point 
of  view  as  well;  for  so  it  is  seen  in  the  world.  Thus  though 
foam,  ripple,  wave,  bubble,  etc.  which  are  different  modifica¬ 
tions  of  the  sea,  consisting  of  water,  are  non-different  from  the 
sea,  still  amongst  themselves  are  perceived  actions  and  reactions 
in  the  form  of  separating  or  coalescing.  And  yet  the  foam, 
wave,  etc.,  do  not  lose  their  individuality  in  relation  to  one 
another,  even  though  they  are  modifications  of  the  sea  and 
non-different  from  it,  which  is  but  water.  Again,  even  though 
they  do  not  lose  their  individuality  in  one  another,  they  are 
never  different  from  the  point  of  view  of  their  being  the  sea. 
Similar  is  the  case  here.  The  experiencer  and  the  things  experi¬ 
enced  never  get  identified  with  each  other,  nor  do  they  differ 
from  the  supreme  Brahman.  Although  the  experiencer  is  not  a 
transformation  of  Brahman,  for  in  the  Upani$adic  text,  “Having 


326 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[ILL  13 


created  that,  He  entered  into  that”  (Tai.  II.  vi),  it  has  been 
stated  that  the  Creator  Himself,  without  undergoing  any 
change,  has  become  the  experiencer  by  entering  into  His  prod¬ 
uct  (the  body),  still  some  difference  accrues  to  one  who  has 
entered  into  the  product,  owing  to  the  presence  of  the  prod¬ 
uct  which  serves  as. the  limiting  adjunct,  just  as  much  as  space 
becomes  divided,  owing  to  the  presence  of  conditioning  factors 
like  pot  etc.  Thus  it  is  said  that  though  all  things  are  non- 
different  from  the  supreme  cause,  Brahman,  still  there  can  be 
such  a  distinction  as  the  experiencer  and  the  things  experienced 
on  the  analogy  of  the  sea  and  its  waves  etc. 

Topic  6:  Origin 


There  is  non-difference  of  those  (cause  and 
effect)  on  account  of  the  texts  about  origin 

etc. 

14.  There  is  non-difference  of  those  cause  and  effect  on 
account  of  the  texts  about  origin  etc. 

Assuming,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  an  empirical  difference 
between  the  experiencer  and  the  things  experienced,  the  refuta¬ 
tion  (under  the  previous  aphorism)  was  advanced  by  holding 
that  “the  distinction  can  well  exist  as  observed  in  common 
experience”.  But  in  reality,  this  difference  does  not  exist,  since 
a  non-difference  between  those  cause  and  effect  is  recognized. 
The  effect  is  the  universe,  diversified  as  space  etc.  and  the  cause 
is  the  supreme  Brahman.  In  reality  it  is  known  that  the  effect  has 
non-difference  from,  i.e.  non-existence  in  isolation  from,  that 
cause. 

How  so? 

“On  account  of  the  texts  about  origin  etc.”  (in  the  Upanisad). 
As  for  the  word  “origin”,  it  occurs  by  way  of  citing  an 
illustration,  called  for  by  the  assertion  that  the  knowledge 
of  all  follows  from  the  knowledge  of  one:  “As,  O  amiable 
one,  all  things  made  of  clay  are  known  when  a  lump  of 


n.i.14]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  327 

clay  is  known,  since  a  modification  has  speech  as  its  origin 
and  exists  only  in  name;  as  clay  alone  it  is  true”  (Ch. 
VI.  i.  4).  The  idea  implied  is  this:  When  a  lump  of  clay 
is  known  as  nothing  but  clay  in  reality,  all  things  made  of 
clay,  for  instance  pot,  plate,  jar,  etc.,  become  known,  since  they 
are  non-different  as  clay,  because  of  which  fact  it  is  said,  “A 
modification  has  speech  as  its  origin  and  exists  only  in  name”. 
A  modification,  e.g.  a  pot,  plate,  or  jar,  etc.  originates  from 
speech  alone  that  makes  it  current  by  announcing,  “It  exists”. 
But  speaking  from  the  standpoint  of  the  basic  substance,  no 
modification  exists  as  such  (apart  from  the  clay).  It  has  existence 
only  in  name  and  it  is  unreal.  As  clay  alone  it  is  real.  This  is 
an  illustration  about  Brahman  cited  in  the  Upani$ad.  From  the 
use  of  the  phrase,  “speech  as  its  origin”,  in  connection  with 
the  illustration,  it  can  be  understood  that  even  from  the  stand¬ 
point  of  the  thing  illustrated  (viz  Brahman),  no  modification 
has  any  existence  separately  from  Brahman.  Again,  after  stating 
that  fire,  water,  and  food  (earth)  are  the  effects  of  Brahman, 
the  Upanisad  says  that  the  products  of  fire,  water,  and  food  have 
no  existence  in  isolation  from  fire,  water,  and  food  themselves: 
“The  firehood  of  the  (gross)  fire  is  gone,  since  a  modification  has 
speech  as  its  origin  and  exists  only  in  name.  The  three  colours 
are  alone  true”4  (Ch.  VI.  iv.  1).  Because  of  the  use  of  the  word 
“etc.”  in  “on  account  of  texts  about  origin  etc.”,  are  to  be 
cited  the  many  texts  establishing  the  oneness  of  the  Self,  such 
as,  “All  this  has  That  as  its  essence;  That  is  the  Reality;  That 
is  the  Self;  That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  “...and  this 
all  are  the  Self”  (By.  II.  iv.  6),  “All  this  is  but  Brahman”  (Mu. 
II.  ii.  11),  “All  this  is  but  the  Self”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2),  “There 
is  no  difference  whatever  in  It”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  19),  etc.  Moreover, 
the  knowledge  of  all  cannot  be  brought  about  by  the  knowledge 
of  one  in  any  other  way.  As  the  spaces  within  pots  or  jars  are 
non-different  from  the  cosmic  space  or  as  water  in  a  mirage 

4  The  gross  fire  is  a  mixture  of  the  subtle  elements — fire,  water,  and 
earth,  which  are  red,  white,  and  black  in  colour  respectively'.  The  gross 
fire  gets  all  these  colours  from  its  constituents,  and  when  analysed  back, 
it  is  seen  as  nothing  but  those  subtle  elements  with  their  own  charac¬ 
teristics.  ‘Food’  here  means  earth. 


330  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  14 

Vedantin :  As  to  this,  the  reply  is:  That  is  no  defect;  for 
earlier  than  the  realization  of  the  identity  of  the  Self  with 
Brahman,  all  activities  can  justly  be  true  like  the  activities  in 
dream  before  waking  up.  So  long  as  the  oneness  of  the  true 
Self  is  not  realized,  nobody  entertains  the  idea  of  unreality  when 
dealing  with  the  means  of  knowledge,  objects  of  knowledge, 
and  the  results;  rather,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  all  creatures  discard 
their  natural  oneness  with  Brahman  to  accept  through  ignorance 
the  modifications  themselves  as  “I  and  mine” — that  is  to  say,  as 
one’s  Self  or  as  belonging  to  oneself.  Hence  all  common  human 
dealings  or  Vedic  observances  are  logical  (and  valid)  prior  to 
the  realization  of  the  identity  of  the  Self  and  Brahman,  just  as 
much  as  knowledge  with  the  stamp  of  conviction,  supposed 
to  be  attained  through  direct  perception,  does  occur,  before 
waking  up,  to  an  ordinary  man  when  he  is  asleep  and  dreams 
of  things  high  and  low.  The  idea  that  these  are  semblances  of 
perceived  things  does  not  occur  to  him  during  that  dream. 

Opponent :  But  how  can  the  true  knowledge  of  the  identity 
of  the  Self  with  Brahman  arise  from  the  unreal  Upani$adic  texts? 
For  a  man  does  not  die  when  bitten  by  a  snake  superimposed 
(by  him)  on  a  rope,  nor  are  such  needs  as  drinking  and  bathing 
fulfilled  by  the  water  in  a  mirage. 

Vedantin :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  for  death  etc.  are  seen 
to  result  from  the  suspicion  of  poison  etc.,  and  in  the  case  of  a 
man  in  a  state  of  dream  even  such  acts  as  being  bitten  by  a 
snake  and  bathing  in  water  do  happen.  Should  one  argue  that 
such  an  act  too  is  false,  we  would  say  that  though  the  snake¬ 
bite  and  bathing  in  water  in  the  case  of  a  dreamer  be  false,  still 
the  knowledge  resulting  from  those  acts  is  true,  since  that 
knowledge  is  not  sublated  even  when  he  wakes  up.  For  even 
when  a  man  knows  after  waking  that  the  acts  of  snake-bite  and 
bathing  in  water  etc.,  experienced  by  him  in  dream,  were  false, 
he  does  not  surely  consider  the  knowledge  of  those  acts  to  be 
false  as  well.  By  this — this  non-sublation  of  the  knowledge 
acquired  by  a  dreamer — it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  doctrine 
of  the  identity  of  the  Self  with  the  mere  body  is  also  discarded.5 

6  After  seeing  oneself  in  a  dream  as  possessed  of  a  grotesque  body,  one 
wakes  up  to  see  oneself  in  another  body,  but  even  then  one  remembers, 


n.i.14]  BRAHMA-  SCTRA-BHA§YA  331 

In  support  of  this  (true  result  arising  from  an  unreal  basis)  is 
the  Vedic  text:  “If  in  the  course  of  performing  some  rite  with 
a  view  to  obtaining  results,  one  sees  a  woman  in  a  dream,  one 
should  conclude  from  that  dream  that  the  rite  will  be  successful” 
(Ch.  V.  ii.  8),  which  shows  the  true  fulfilment  of  a  desire  from 
the  seeing  of  a  false  dream.  So  also,  after  declaring  that  when 
some  evil  omens  come  within  the  range  of  one’s  direct  percep¬ 
tion,  one  should  conclude,  “Methinks  I  shall  not  live  long”,  it 
is  said,  “Then  again,  a  black  man  with  black  teeth,  if  seen  in  a 
dream,  causes  the  death  of  the  dreamer”,  which  text  shows 
that  true  death  is  indicated  by  that  false  dream  itself.  Moreover, 
it  is  a  well-known  fact  in  this  world,  that  to  people,  well  versed 
in  the  method  of  inferring  from  agreement  and  difference,  a 
dream  of  a  particular  type  prognosticates  something,  while  a 
dream  of  another  type  foreshadows  something  else.  Similarly 
from  the  false  perception  of  the  presence  of  letters  in  some 
lines  (drawn  on  paper)  the  true  letters  like  a  etc.  are  grasped.6 
Furthermore,  the  Upani?ads  are  the  ultimate  (conclusive)  means 
of  valid  knowledge,  establishing  the  truth  of  the  oneness  of  the 
Self,7  after  which  nothing  else  remains  to  be  sought  after  for 
knowledge.  Unlike  the  curiosity  arising  in  common  life  to  know 
“what,  with  what,  and  how”  on  hearing  the  injunction  “one 
should  sacrifice”,  there  remains  nothing  more  to  be  sought  for 
after  one  is  taught,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7).  or  “I  am 
Brahman”  (Bp.  IV.  iv.  5),  for  that  knowledge  has  for  its  content 
the  Self  which  is  all.  A  curiosity  can  arise  only  when  something 
is  left  over,  but  nothing  remains  there  beyond  the  oneness  of 
the  Self  about  which  one  may  become  curious.  Besides,  it  cannot 
be  said  that  such  a  knowledge  does  not  arise,  since  there  are  the 

“I  dreamt  thus”.  This  recognition  of  oneself  in  different  bodies  would 
not  have  been  possible  if  the  cognizing  Self  did  not  exist  as  the  changeless 
witness  in  all  the  states,  and  different  from  the  bodies. 

8  The  letters  of  the  alphabet  are  known  from  the  spoken  languages, 
though  they  are  represented  by  symbolical  lines  on  paper.  These  scrib- 
blings  are  not  the  real  letters. 

7  So  unity  and  diversity  cannot  coexist.  The  Upanisads  are  an  inde¬ 
pendent  means  of  a  unique  knowledge  of  non-duality,  which  cannot  be 
sublated  by  other  means  of  knowledge,  whereas  this  ultimate  knowledge 
eradicates  all  ideas  of  duality. 


332  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [II.i.14 

Upani$adic  texts  like,  “That  reality  of  the  Self  he  knew  from 
him”  (Ch.  VI.  xvi.  3).  And  this  conclusion  also  follows  from 
the  enjoining  of  hearing  etc.,  and  study  etc.  of  the  Vedas  as 
(direct  and  indirect)  means  to  realization.  It  cannot  be  said  that 
this  realization  is  useless  or  erroneous,  since  it  is  seen  to  lead  to 
the  eradication  of  ignorance,  and  since  there  is  no  other  know¬ 
ledge  to  override  it.  We  said  earlier  that  before  the  realization 
of  the  oneness  of  the  Self,  all  ideas  of  true  and  false  involved  in 
human  and  Vedic  dealings  remain  intact.  Hence  when  all  the 
old  ideas  of  multiplicity  become  uprooted  after  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  the  oneness  of  the  Self  by  the  ultimate  means  of  valid 
knowledge,  there  can  be  no  fancying  of  Brahman  as  a  composite 
thing. 

Opponent :  From  the  citation  of  the  analogy  of  clay  etc.,  does 
it  not  follow  that,  according  to  the  scriptures,  Brahman  is 
capable  of  transformation?  For  things  like  clay  etc.  are  known 
in  the  world  to  be  changeful. 

Vedantin :  We  say,  no,  since  Brahman  is  known  to  be  change¬ 
less  from  the  Upani$adic  texts  denying  all  kinds  of  change, 
such  as,  “That  great  birthless  Self  is  undecaying,  immortal, 
undying,  fearless,  and  Brahman”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  25),  “This  Self  is 
that  which  has  been  described  as  ‘Not  this,  not  this’  ”  (Bj\  IV.  iv. 
22),  “Neither  gross  nor  minute”  (Bj\  III.  viii.  8)  etc.  For  one 
cannot  comprehend  that  the  same  Brahman  can  be  possessed  of 
the  attributes  of  change  and  changelessness. 

Opponent :  It  can  be  like  motion  and  motionlessness. 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  Brahman  has  been  qualified  as  changeless; 
for  the  changeless  Brahman  cannot  be  possessed  of  diverse  attri¬ 
butes  like  motion  and  motionlessness.  And  we  said  earlier  that 
Brahman  is  changeless  and  eternal,  it  having  been  denied  that 
Brahman  can  undergo  any  modification  whatsoever.  It  cannot 
be  argued  that  just  as  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  as  the  one 
(non-dual)  Self  brings  about  liberation,  so  also  Its  knowledge  as 
an  entity  transforming  Itself  into  the  world  is  intended  to  lead 
to  some  independent  result;  for  there  is  no  evidence  in  support. 
The  scripture  reveals  only  the  result  arising  from  the  realization 
of  the  unchanging  Brahman  as  the  Self;  for  instance,  the  com¬ 
mencement  is  made  with,  “This  Self  is  that  which  has  been 


n.  i.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  333 

described  as  ‘Not  this,  not  this’  ”  (Bf.  IV.  ii.  4),  and  then  it  is 
said,  “You  have  attained  that  which  is  free  from  fear”  (ibid.); 
there  are  also  other  texts  of  this  kind.  That  being  so,  the  con¬ 
clusion  to  be  drawn  is  this:  Since  in  a  context  speaking  of 
Brahman,  it  stands  proved  that  the  result  (i.e.  liberation)  accrues 
only  from  the  realization  of  Brahman,  devoid  of  all  distinctions 
created  by  attributes,  therefore  when  in  that  context  some  other 
fact  is  heard  of  that  has  no  result,  as  for  instance,  the  modifi¬ 
cation  of  Brahman  into  the  world,  that  fact  has  to  be  interpreted 
as  a  means  leading  to  that  realization.  And  this  has  to  be  done  on 
the  strength  of  the  adage,  “Any  act  enjoined  without  mention¬ 
ing  a  result,  closely  on  the  heels  of  some  other  act  having  a 
result,  has  to  be  accepted  as  forming  a  part  of  the  latter”;  but 
it  is  not  imagined  to  bear  a  separate  result.  It  is  not  reasonable 
to  say  that  from  a  knowledge  of  Brahman  as  capable  of  transfor¬ 
mation,  one  will  get  that  capacity  of  transforming  one’s  own 
Self;8  for  liberation  is  changelessly  eternal. 

Opponent :  Since  the  believers  in  a  changeless  Brahman  have 
a  predilection  for  absolute  unity,  there  will  be  no  ruler  and  the 
ruled,  so  that  the  assertion  that  God  is  the  cause  (of  the 
universe)  will  be  contradicted. 

Vedmtin :  No,  since  that  omniscience  (of  God)  is  contingent 
on  the  manifestation  of  name  and  form  which  are  creations  of 
ignorance  and  which  constitute  the  seeds  of  the  world.  In 
accordance  with  the  texts  like,  “From  that  Self  which  is  such, 
originated  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  2),  it  was  asserted  under  the  aphor¬ 
ism,  “That  from  which  this  world  has  its  birth  etc.”  (B.  S.  I.  i.  2), 
that  the  origin,  continuance,  and  dissolution  of  the  world  result 
not  from  the  insentient  Pradhana  or  anything  else,  but  from  God 
who  is  by  nature  eternal,  pure,  intelligent,  and  free,  as  also 
omniscient  and  omnipotent.  That  assertion  remains  intact. 
Nothing  contradictory  to  that  is  stated  here  again. 

Opponent :  How  is  it  not  stated  by  one  who  speaks  of  the 
absolute  oneness  and  non-duality  of  the  Self? 

Vedantin :  Listen,  how  it  is  not  stated.  Name  and  form  which 

8  According  to  the  declaration  that  one  becomes  just  what  one  meditates 
Brahman  to  be. 


334 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  i.  14 


constitute  the  seeds  of  the  entire  expanse  of  phenomenal  exist¬ 
ence,  and  which  are  conjured  up  by  nescience,  are,  as  it  were, 
non-different  from  the  omniscient  God,  and  they  are  non- 
determinable  either  as  real  or  unreal,  and  are  mentioned  in  the 
Vedas  and  the  Smrtis  as  the  power,  called  Maya,  of  omniscient 
God,  or  as  prakrti  (primordial  Nature).  But  omniscient  God  is 
different  from  them,  as  is  known  from  the  Upani$adic  text, 
“That  which  is  Space  (Brahman)  is  the  accomplisher  of  name 
and  form.  That  in  which  they  subsist  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  VIII. 
xiv.  1).  And  there  are  also  in  evidence  texts  like,  “Let  me 
manifest  name  and  form”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2),  “The  omniscient 
Being  who  creates  all  forms,  gives  them  names,  (and  entering 
into  them)  goes  on  uttering  these”  etc.  (Tai.  A.  III.  xii.  7),  “He 
who  diversifies  the  single  seed”  (Sv.  VI.  12).  Thus  like  space 
conforming  to  the  conditioning  factors  like  pot,  jar,  etc.,  God 
conforms  to  the  limiting  adjuncts — name  and  form — created  by 
nescience.  And  within  the  domain  of  empirical  existence,  He 
rules  it  over  the  selves  which  identify  themselves  with  the  (indi¬ 
vidual)  intellects  and  are  called  creatures,  and  which  though 
identical  with  Himself,  conform,  like  the  spaces  in  pots  etc.,  to 
the  assemblages  of  bodies  and  senses  created  by  name  and  form 
that  are  called  up  by  nescience.  Thus  God’s  rulership,  omnis¬ 
cience,  and  omnipotence  are  contingent  on  the  limiting  adjuncts 
conjured  up  by  nescience;  but  not  so  in  reality  can  such  terms 
as  “the  ruler”,  “the  ruled”,  “omniscience”,  etc.,  be  used  with 
regard  to  the  Self  shining  in  Its  own  nature  after  the  removal 
of  all  limiting  adjuncts  through  illumination.  Hence  it  has  been 
said,  “That  is  infinity  where  one  does  not  see  anything  else, 
does  not  hear  anything  else,  does  not  know  anything  else”  (Ch. 
VII.  xxiv.  1),  as  also,  “But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman 
everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what  should  one  see  and 
through  what?”  (Br.  II.  iv.  14,  IV.  v.  15),  and  so  on.  Thus  all 
the  Upani$ads  speak  of  the  cessation  of  all  empirical  dealings  in 
the  state  of  the  Highest  Reality.  So  also  in  the  Song  Divine : 
“Neither  agency,  nor  actions  does  the  Lord  create  for  the  world, 
nor  (does  He  bring  about  the  union  with  the  fruit  of  action. 
It  is  universal  ignorance  that  does  it  all).  The  Omnipresent  takes 
note  of  the  merit  and  demerit  of  none.  Knowledge  is  enveloped 


II.  i.  15]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  335 

in  ignorance,  hence  do  beings  get  deluded”  (Gita,  V.  14-15).  In 
this  text  it  is  shown  that  in  the  state  of  the  highest  Reality,  all 
transactions  as  between  an  ordainer  and  things  ordained  cease 
to  exist.  But  within  the  state  of  phenomenal  existence,  even 
the  Upanisads  mention  such  behaviour  as  divine  rulership,  as 
in  the  text,  “He  is  the  Lord  of  all.  He  is  the  ruler  of  all  beings, 
He  is  the  protector  of  all  beings.  He  is  the  embankment  serving 
as  the  boundary  to  keep  the  different  worlds  apart”  (Bj\  IV. 
iv.  22).  So  also  in  the  Song  Divine :  “The  Lord,  O  Arjuna, 
dwells  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings,  causing  all  beings  by  His 
Maya,  to  revolve  (as  if)  mounted  on  a  machine”  (Gita,  XVIII. 
61).  The  aphorist  (Vyasa)  also  has  the  supreme  Reality  in  mind 
when  he  writes  the  aphorism,  “It  has  non-difference  from  That 
(Brahman)”  etc.  (II.  i.  14);  but  when  he  has  the  empirical 
standpoint  in  view,  he  says,  “Such  distinction  can  exist  as 
observed  in  common  experience”  (II.  i.  13),  where  he  speaks  of 
Brahman  as  comparable  to  a  vast  ocean.  Again,  without  denying 
the  vast  phenomenal  creation,  he  resorts  to  the  process  of  trans¬ 
formation,  in  so  far  as  this  can  be  made  use  of  in  the  worship 
of  the  qualified  Brahman. 

||  txil 

^  And  because  (the  effect  is)  perceived  when 

(the  cause  is)  present. 

IS.  (Cause  and  effect  are  non-diff  event)  since  the  effect  is 
perceived  when  the  cause  is  there . 

The  effect  is  non-different  from  the  cause  for  this  further 
reason,  that  the  effect  is  perceived  when  the  cause  is  there,  but 
not  otherwise.9  For  instance,  the  pot  is  perceived  when  the  clay 
is  there,  and  the  cloth  is  perceived  when  the  yams  are  there. 
But  it  is  not  an  (usual)  invariable  fact  that  something  is  seen 
when  something  other  than  it  is  present,  for  it  is  not  the  case 
that  a  cow,  which  is  different  from  a  horse,  is  seen  only  where 

9  Not  only  is  the  existence  of  the  effect  dependent  on  the  existence  of 
the  (material)  cause,  but  its  perception  also  is  dependent  on  the  percep¬ 
tion  of  the  material. 


336  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [ILL  15 

a  horse  is  present.  Nor  is  it  a  fact  that  a  pot  is  perceived  only 
when  the  potter  is  there,  even  though  there  is  the  relation  of 
agentship  and  effect;  for  they  are  different. 

Opponent :  Even  the  presence  of  something  is  invariably 
perceived  when  something  other  than  itself  is  present,  as  for 
instance  smoke  can  exist  only  if  fire  is  present. 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  is,  no;  for  even  when  the  fire 
is  extinguished,  smoke,  as  held  up  in  a  cowherd’s  pot  etc.,  is 
seen  to  persist.  Should  you,  however,  qualify  the  smoke  as 
subject  to  certain  conditions  (e.g.  a  smoke  that  rises  up  from  a 
place  in  a  continuous  stream),  and  say  that  a  smoke  of  that 
kind  cannot  exist  unless  there  be  fire,  still  it  will  not  vitiate  our 
proposition;  for  we  say  that  the  reason  for  holding  that  the 
(material)  cause  and  effect  are  non-different  is  that  (not  only  can 
the  effect  exist  only  when  the  cause  exists,  but  also  that)  the  idea 
of  the  effect  can  exist  only  when  the  idea  having  the  impress  of 
the  cause  persists.  And  this  coexistence  we  do  not  get  in  the 
case  of  fire  and  smoke  (see  f.n.  9). 

Or  the  aphorism  is:  || 

The  meaning  is  this:  Not  only  is  the  non-difference  of  the 
cause  and  effect  to  be  accepted  on  the  authority  of  scriptures, 
their  non-difference  is  “also  to  be  accepted  on  the  strength  of 
the  existence  of  such  a  perception”;  for  direct  perception  does 
occur  about  the  non-difference  of  the  cause  and  effect.  It  is 
thus:  In  a  cloth  constituted  by  an  arrangement  of  yams,  one 
does  not  perceive  the  cloth  apart  from  the  yams;  but  the  yams 
themselves,  arranged  as  warps  and  woofs,  are  perceived  inde¬ 
pendently.  Similarly  with  regard  to  the  fibres  forming  the 
yarn,  and  the  constitutents  of  the  fibre  in  relation  to  the  fibre 
itself.  By  this  direct  perception  are  known  the  three  colours — 
red,  white,  and  black  (of  fire,  water,  and  earth — Ch.  VI.  iv) 
— (as  constituting  the  minute  parts  of  the  fibre  etc.).  From 
these  are  to  be  inferred10  (the  imperceptible)  subtle  air  and 
subtle  space.  Beyond  that  is  the  supreme  Brahman — one  without 

“Where  we  lack  perception,  the  cause  has  to  be  inferred  thus  from  the 
effect:  “The  thing  under  consideration  must  be  non-different  from  its 
material  cause,  for  it  is  a  product,  just  as  much  as  a  cloth.” 


ILL  17]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  337 

a  second.  And  we  said  that  in  It  culminate  all  means  of 
knowledge. 


\\\%\\ 

And  owing  to  the  existence  of  the  posterior 

one. 

16.  And  ( cause  and  effect  are  non-different)  because  the 
posterior  one  has  ( earlier )  existence  (in  the  cause). 

From  this  additional  reason  the  effect  is  non-different  from 
the  cause:  The  subsequently  originating  effect  is  heard  of  (in 
the  Upani$ad)  as  existing  in  the  cause  in  identity  with  it  before 
its  own  origin;  for  in  the  texts,  “O  amiable  one,  this  world  was 
but  Existence  Itself  before  creation”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  and  “In 
the  beginning  this  was  but  the  absolute  Self  alone”  (Ai.  I.  i.  1), 
the  effect,  referred  to  by  the  word  “this”,  occurs  in  apposition 
(having  the  same  case-ending)  with  the  cause  (showing  that  they 
are  identical).  And  a  thing  which  does  not  exist  in  and  in 
identity  with  something  does  not  originate  from  that,  as  for 
instance  oil  from  sand.  Hence  from  the  fact  of  non-difference 
before  origin,  it  is  understood  that  the  effect  must  be  non- 
different  from  the  cause  even  after  its  birth.  Just  as  Brahman, 
the  cause  is  never  without  existence  in  all  the  three  periods  of 
time,  so  also  the  universe,  which  is  the  effect,  never  parts  with 
Existence  in  all  the  three  periods.  But  Existence  is  only  one. 
And  this  is  a  further  ground  for  the  non-difference  of  the  effect 
from  the  cause. 

Owing  to  the  declaration  of  non-existence 
(the  effect  did)  not  (exist)  (before  creation)  if  such 

be  the  objection,  (it  is)  not  so,  since  from  the 

complementary  portion  (it  is  known  that  the  word  is  used) 
from  the  standpoint  of  a  difference  of  characteristics. 

/7.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  effect  did  not  exist  before  creationy 
22 


338  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  17 

since  it  is  declared  (in  the  Upanifad)  as  “non-existent”,  then  we 
say ,  no,  because  from  the  complementary  portion  it  is  known 
that  the  word  is  used  from  the  standpoint  of  a  difference  o] 
characteristics . 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  non-existence  of  the  effect  also  declared 
by  the  Upani$ads  now  and  then,  as  in,  “This  was  indeed  non¬ 
existent  in  the  beginning”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1),  “This  was  non¬ 
existent  in  the  beginning  to  be  sure”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1).  Therefore 
from  the  declaration  of  this  non-existence,  the  effect  did  not 
exist  before  creation.,, 

Vedantin :  We  say,  no,  for  this  declaration  of  the  non-exist¬ 
ence  of  the  effect  before  creation  is  not  meant  to  imply  absolute 
non-existence. 

What  is  the  implication  then? 

The  condition  in  which  name  and  form  become  evolved  is 
different  from  the  condition  in  which  name  and  form  are  not 
so  evolved.  Hence  although  the  effect  exists  as  non-different 
from  the  cause  before  creation,  still  from  the  standpoint  of  this 
difference  in  conditions  the  effect  is  declared  to  be  non-existent 
before  creation. 

How  is  this  known? 

From  the  complementary  portion  of  the  passage.  A  passage 
whose  meaning  is  doubtful  in  the  beginning  is  ascertained  from 
its  complementary  portion.  Here,  for  instance,  (in  the  Chan- 
dogya  passage  quoted  above),  what  is  referred  to  in  the  begin¬ 
ning  by  the  word  “non-existence”  in  the  sentence,  “This  was 
indeed  non-existent  in  the  beginning”,  is  again  alluded  to  by 
the  word  “that”  and  specified  as  “Existence”  in,  “That  was 
Existence”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1).  Moreover,  since  non-existence  has 
no  relation  with  any  sequence  of  time,  preceding  or  succeeding, 
the  word  “was”  becomes  illogical.  In  the  sentence,  “This  was 
non-existent  in  the  beginning  to  be  sure”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1)  also, 
absolute  non-existence  is  not  meant,  since  in  the  complementary 
portion  occurs  the  qualifying  sentence,  “That  created  Itself  by 
Itself”11  (ibid.).  Therefore  this  declaration  of  non-existence  of 
the  effect  before  creation  is  made  from  the  standpoint  of  a 

u  Non-existence  cannot  be  the  subject  or  object  of  any  action. 


n.i.18]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  339 

difference  of  conditions.  Since  in  the  world  a  thing  is  said  to 
exist  when  it  manifests  itself  through  name  and  form,  therefore, 
as  a  concession  to  common  sense,  the  universe  is  said  to  be  non¬ 
existent  before  being  evolved  through  name  and  form. 

S&SFZtm  \\\*\\ 

From  reasoning  from  another  passage  ^  as 

well. 

18.  (The  pre-existence  and  non-difference  of  the  effect  are 
established)  from  reasoning  and  another  Upanisadic  text . 

From  reasoning  also,  as  well  as  another  Upanisadic  text,  it  is 
known  that  the  effect  exists  before  its  creation  and  that  it  is 
non-different  from  the  cause.  Of  these,  the  reasoning  is  being 
adduced  first.  In  the  world  it  is  seen  that  people  wanting  curds, 
pots,  necklaces,  etc.  take  up  their  well-established  respective 
(material)  causes — milk,  clay,  gold,  etc.  Not  that  a  man  wanting 
curds  takes  up  earth,  or  a  man  wanting  a  pot  takes  up  milk. 
This  fact  does  not  fit  in  with  the  theory  of  the  non-existence 
of  the  effect  before  origination.  If  everything  be  equally  non¬ 
existent  everywhere  before  creation,  why  should  curds  be  pro¬ 
duced  from  milk  alone  and  not  from  clay;  and  why  should  a 
pot  come  out  of  clay  and  not  out  of  milk?  It  may  be  said  that 
although  non-existence  before  creation  is  indistinguishable,  still 
curds  have  some  special  property  (of  being  latent)  in  milk 
alone,  but  not  in  clay,  and  the  pot  has  some  special  prop¬ 
erty  (of  being  latent)  in  clay  alone,  but  not  in  milk.  (Or — 
“Milk,  but  not  clay,  has  some  special  potency  for  curds, 
and  clay,  but  not  milk,  has  some  special  potency  for  a 
pot”).  But  then  as  a  result  of  this  possession  of  potency 
by  the  state  preceding  origination,  the  theory  of  the  non¬ 
existence  of  the  effect  before  creation  will  fall  through,12 
and  the  theory  of  the  pre-existence  of  the  effect  will 
stand  confirmed.  Again,  when  some  potency  is  assumed  in  the 

uIs  the  special  quality  (latency  or  potency)  an  attribute  of  the  effect 
or  cause?  In  the  former  case,  the  effect,  as  possessed  of  an  attribute  even 
before  creation,  cannot  be  pronounced  non-existent. 


340  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  18 

cause,  to  determine  the  effect,  that  potency  cannot  influence 
the  effect  by  being  different  (from  the  cause  and  effect)  or 
non-existent  (like  the  effect),  since  (on  either  supposition)  non¬ 
existence  and  difference  will  pertain  to  that  potency  as  much 
as  to  the  effect.13  Therefore  the  potency  must  be  the  very 
essence  of  the  cause,  and  the  effect  must  be  involved  in  the 
very  core  of  the  potency.  Besides,  we  do  not  have  any  such 
idea  of  difference  between  cause  and  effect,  substance  and 
qualities,  and  such  other  pairs  as  between  a  horse  and  a  buffalo; 
and  hence  their  non-difference  has  to  be  admitted.  Even  if  a 
relationship  of  inherence  be  postulated,14  it  will  lead  to  an 
infinite  regress,  since  if  the  inherence  has  to  be  related  to  a 
thing  in  which  it  is  to  inhere  by  the  assumption  of  another 
relation  (between  the  inherence  and  the  thing),  one  will  be 
forced  to  fancy  another  relation  to  connect  this  one  with 
inherence,  etc.,  and  still  another  relation  to  connect  the  new 
relation,  and  so  on.  Or  if  this  new  relation  be  not  admitted, 
the  things  will  remain  disconnected.  If  it  be  said  that  inherence 
being  itself  a  relation,  it  becomes  connected  with  entities  by 
itself  without  the  help  of  any  intermediate  relation,  then  the 
relationship  of  conjunction  also,  being  a  relation,  should  become 
so  connected  (with  entities)  without  the  help  of  inherence.15 
Moreover,  since  identity  between  substance  and  qualities  etc.  is 
actually  apprehended,  it  is  vain  to  assume  a  relationship  of 
inherence.  And  while  subsisting  in  the  cause  (i.e.  the  com¬ 
ponent  parts),  in  what  way  will  the  product,  constituted  by 
parts,  subsist  in  its  cause,  viz  the  component  parts?  Will  it 

“If  the  potentiality  be  different  from  both  cause  and  effect  or  if  it  be 
non-existent,  it  may  produce  anything  rather  than  the  effect,  for  its 
features  of  being  different  and  non-existent  are  equally  present  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  other  things. 

14  To  the  objection  that  if  cause  and  effect  be  (substantially)  different, 
they  should  be  perceived  as  such,  the  opponent  may  reply  that  the 
difference  is  not  perceived  owing  to  the  relation  of  inherence  (invariable 
concomitance)  between  them. 

“According  to  Nyaya  philosophy,  the  relation  between  substance  and 
quality,  genus  and  individuals,  etc.  is  inherence.  But  two  things  become 
joined  through  conjunction,  which  becomes  connected  with  each  through 
inherence.  Conjunction  is  an  attribute  and  not  a  relation. 


II.  i.  18]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  341 

inhere  in  the  parts  as  a  whole  or  correctively  in  them  part  by 
part?  If  it  exists  on  the  parts  as  a  whole,  then  there  will  be  no 
perception  of  the  product,  since  it  is  impossible  to  have  a 
(simultaneous)  sense-perception  of  all  the  parts;  for  the  whole, 
existing  in  all  its  bases  taken  together,  is  not  apprehended  by 
perceiving  its  bases  separately.  If,  however,  the  effect  subsists  in 
all  the  (constituent)  parts  correlatively  (part  by  part),  still 
we  have  to  postulate  some  (fresh)  parts  for  that  product  other 
than  those  constituent  parts  themselves,  by  virtue  of  which  the 
product  may  reside  correlatively  in  the  parts  producing  it;  for 
a  sword  fills  up  a  scabbard  through  such  of  its  component  parts 
as  are  different  from  the  components  of  the  scabbard.  And  this 
will  lead  to  an  infinite  regress,  for  we  shall  have  to  imagine  at 
every  step  some  new  components  to  be  inserted  into  the  earlier 
ones.  Again,  if  it  subsists  (successively)  in  all  the  parts  taken 
separately,  then  when  action  takes  place  in  one  part,  there  will 
be  no  action  in  others;  for  when  Devadatta  is  present  at  Srughna, 
he  is  not  present  on  that  very  day  at  Pa^aliputra.  If  presence  in 
various  parts  at  the  same  time  be  meant,  that  will  presuppose  a 
multiplicity  of  (causal)  entities,  as  in  the  case  of  Devadatta  and 
Yajnadatta  residing  in  Srughna  and  Pataliputra  (respectively). 

Opponent :  There  is  no  fault  since  the  inherence  can  be  like 
the  (single)  genus  “cowhood”  inhering  in  its  entirety  in  all  the 
cows  individually. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  it  is  not  perceived  thus.  If  the  whole 
(composite  product)  resided  in  its  entirety  in  all  the  components 
individually  like  cowhood  etc.,  then  just  as  cowhood  is  directly 
perceived  in  each  of  the  individual  cows,  so  also  the  whole 
should  have  been  perceived  wholly  in  all  the  separate  parts. 
But  this  does  not  occur  invariably.  Moreover,  if  the  whole 
(composite  product)  abides  in  its  totality  in  each  part,  then 
since  the  whole  has  competence  to  perform  all  its  own  functions, 
and  since  it  is  the  same  (even  when  existing  separately  on  all 
the  parts)  it  should  perform  the  duties  of  the  teats  even  through 
the  horn  (of  the  animal),  and  the  duties  of  the  back  through 
the  chest.  But  this  is  not  our  experience. 

Furthermore,  if  the  effect  does  not  exist  before  origination,  the 
creative  action  will  be  without  any  agent  and  without  any 


342  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.  18 

reality.  But  creation  is  an  act,  which,  like  motion  etc.,  must  have 
an  agent,  it  is  a  contradiction  in  terms  that  there  can  be  an  act 
but  no  agent.16  When,  therefore,  somebody  would  speak  of  the 
origin  of  a  pot  (as  “The  pot  originates,,),  the  act  of  origin 
would  not  have  the  pot  itself  as  the  subject. 

What  will  be  the  subject  then? 

It  has  to  be  imagined  that  the  origin  has  something  else  as 
the  subject  (of  the  verb).  Similarly,  when  the  origin  of  the 
(two)  parts  of  a  pot  is  spoken  of,  it  will  have  to  be  imagined 
that  the  origin  has  some  other  thing  (and  not  the  two  halves) 
as  the  subject.  And  if  that  be  so,  then  when  it  is  asserted  that 
a  (non-existing)  pot  is  originating,  it  will  mean  that  the  agents 
like  the  potter  etc.  are  originating.  But  it  is  not  a  fact  of  com¬ 
mon  experience  that  when  the  origin  of  a  pot  is  spoken  of,  the 
emergence  of  the  potter  etc.  is  perceived.  Rather,  what  is 
perceived  is  that  the  potter  etc.  have  already  originated. 

If  it  be  argued  again  that  the  origin  of  a  thing  means  but  the 
relation  in  inherence  that  the  product  has  with  its  own  cause 
or  with  existence  ( sattd ),  and  that  is  also  what  constitutes  its 
emergence  into  being,  then  one  should  explain  how  a  thing  can 
have  any  relationship  with  others  before  it  has  any  being.  For 
a  relationship  can  subsist  between  two  existing  things,  but 
neither  between  the  existing  and  non-existing,  nor  between  two 
non-existing  things.  Besides,  non-existence  has  no  name  and 
form  (i.e.  it  is  unreal),  and  hence  it  is  illogical  to  indicate  any 
limit  for  it  by  saying,  “non-existence  before  its  creation”.  For 
in  the  world  we  see  boundaries  set  to  fields  and  houses,  that  is 
to  things  that  exist,  and  not  to  non-existing  ones.  About  the 
unreal  son  of  a  barren  woman  it  is  not  asserted,  “The  son  of  a 
barren  woman  became  a  king  before  the  enthronement  of 
Purnavarman”,  whereby  he  can  be  allotted  to  a  certain  period 
of  time  in  the  sense  that  he  became,  is  becoming,  or  will  become 

iaWhen  one  says,  “The  pot  moves”,  the  pot  is  the  agent  in  the  sense 
of  providing  the  basis  for  the  act  of  moving.  So  when  one  says,  “The 
pot  originates,  the  pot  must  precede  the  act  so  that  it  can  be  the  agent 
providing  the  basis  for  the  act  of  origination.  So  also  the  creative  action 
has  to  take  place  on  some  material.  Without  the  material,  action  can  have 
no  meaning. 


II.  i.  18]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  343 

a  king.  Were  it  possible  for  the  son  of  a  barren  woman  to 
emerge  into  being  after  the  accessories  of  production  (causal 
agents)  were  activated,  then  could  it  be  equally  asserted  that 
the  effect,  non-existing  (before  origin),  would  originate  after 
the  activity  of  the  causal  agents.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact  what 
we  find  is  that  since  the  son  of  a  barren  woman  and  the  non¬ 
existence  of  an  effect  (before  origin)  are  equally  non-existent, 
the  non-existent  effect  cannot  spring  into  being  even  after  the 
causal  agents  become  activated,  just  as  much  as  the  barren 
woman’s  son  does  not  after  the  operation  of  the  causal  agents. 

Opponent :  In  that  case  the  activity  of  the  causal  agent  will 
become  useless.  Just  as  nobody  tries  to  bring  into  existence  or 
cause  what  already  exists,  so  also  nobody  will  make  any  effort 
to  bring  about  an  effect  which  already  exists  (in  the  cause) 
and  is  non-different  from  it.  But  people  do  engage.  Accordingly, 
in  order  to  make  the  activity  of  the  causal  agent  purposeful,  we 
think  that  the  effect  does  not  exist  before  its  production. 

Vedantin :  That  is  not  damaging  since  the  activity  of  the 
causal  agent  gains  a  meaning  by  transforming  the  cause  into 
the  shape  of  the  effect.  For  we  have  said  already  that  the  aspect 
that  the  effect  assumes  is  also  non-different  from  the  cause,  and 
that  anything  not  existing  already  in  the  cause  cannot  be 
produced.  A  thing  does  not  become  different  just  because  of 
the  appearance  of  some  peculiarity;  for  Devadatta,  even  though 
noticed  in  different  attitudes  when  he  has  his  hands  and  feet 
contracted  or  extended,  does  not  differ  in  his  personality, 
since  the  recognition  of  identity  persists  as,  “It  is  he  himself”. 
Similarly  though  the  positions,  in  which  father  and  other 
relatives  are  placed  every  day,  do  not  remain  the  same  all  along, 
still  the  father  and  others  do  not  become  some  other  persons, 
they  being  recognized  as,  “My  father”,  “My  brother”,  “My 
son”,  and  so  on. 

Opponent :  Since  birth  and  death  do  not  intervene,  that  kind 
of  recognition  is  possible  in  those  cases  only,  but  not  elsewhere. 

Vedantin  :  No,  since  even  milk  etc.  are  recognized  as  having 
assumed  the  form  of  curds  etc.  When  (tiny)  invisible  things 
like  the  seeds  of  a  banyan  tree  grow  in  size  through  the  accre¬ 
tion  of  additional  cells  of  the  same  class  and  become  visible  as 


344  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  18 

sprouts  etc.,  it  is  called  their  birth;  and  when  they  become 
invisible  again  through  a  decay  of  those  very  cells,  it  is  called 
their  death.  Now  then,  if  from  the  intervention  of  such  birth 
and  death,  the  non-existent  should  be  considered  to  come  into 
existence  and  the  existent  should  be  considered  to  become  non¬ 
existent,17  then  there  arises  this  predicament  that  the  child 
lying  in  its  mother’s  womb  and  lying  on  its  back  after  birth 
must  be  different.  Similarly  the  contingency  arises  that  a  person 
will  become  different  in  boyhood,  youth,  and  old  age,  and  all 
such  conventional  relationships  as  father  etc.  will  cease  to  exist. 
For  the  same  reason  the  (Buddhist)  theory  of  the  momentariness 
of  everything  is  to  be  understood  as  repudiated.  Again,  in  the 
case  of  one  who  believes  that  the  effect  does  not  exist  before 
origin,  the  activity  of  a  causal  agent  will  have  no  purpose  in 
view,  since  non-existence  cannot  stand  for  the  object  of  any 
effort,  and  it  will  be  tantamount  to  wielding  various  weapons 
with  the  purpose  of  killing  space. 

Opponent :  The  activity  of  the  causal  agent  will  have  for  its 
object  the  (material)  causes  that  produce  the  effect  (through 
inherence). 

Vedantin :  No,  since  it  will  overshoot  the  mark  if  it  is  argued 
that  the  causal  agent,  concerned  with  one  thing  (viz  the  mate¬ 
rial)  will  produce  something  else  (which  is  not  the  material). 

Opponent :  The  effect  is  nothing  but  some  sort  of  a  peculiar 
disposition  of  the  inherent  cause. 

Vedantin :  Then  that  will  lead  to  the  theory  of  the  pre-exist¬ 
ence  of  the  effect  (in  the  cause).  Thus  since  things  like  milk 
etc.,  are  themselves  called  products  when  they  exist  in  the  forms 
of  curds  etc.,  therefore  nobody  can  establish  even  in  a  hundred 
years  that  the  effect  differs  from  its  cause.  Similarly  it  is  the 
primary  cause  (Brahman)  Itself  that  like  an  actor  evolves  into 
the  respective  products  up  to  the  last  one,  and  thus  becomes  the 
object  of  all  empirical  dealings.  From  such  reasoning  it  is  known 

17  Neither  the  parts  nor  the  whole  has  any  birth  or  death  as  such;  bur 
that  kind  of  terminology  is  used  on  account  of  the  addition  or  diminution 
of  parts.  If  the  opponent  still  argues  that  even  if  this  be  the  meaning  of 
birth  and  death,  still  the  things  experiencing  them  are  substantially  dif¬ 
ferent  and  have  no  identity,  then  this  is  wrong. 


II.  i.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  345 

that  the  effect  exists  before  its  origin  and  that  it  is  non-different 
from  the  cause. 

This  is  also  known  from  “another  Upani$adic  text”.  Since 
texts  denoting  non-existence  were  referred  to  under  the  pre¬ 
vious  aphorism,  “another”  here  means  a  passage  which  is 
different  from  those  and  which  refers  to  existence,  for  instance, 
“O  amiable  one,  in  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  Existence,  one 
without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1).  Again,  the  theory  of  non¬ 
existence  is  first  alluded  to  in  the  words,  “with  regard  to  this 
some  say,  ‘All  this  was  but  non-existence  in  the  beginning’.” 
Then  this  is  challenged  by  saying,  “How  can  existence  come 
out  of  non-existence?”  And  lastly  it  is  asserted,  “O  amiable  one, 
in  the  beginning  all  this  was  Existence  to  be  sure”  (Ch.  VI.  ii. 
1-2).  In  that  passage  we  find  that  the  word  “this”,  meaning  the 
product  (i.e.  creation),  is  placed  in  apposition  with  Existence, 
from  which  fact  the  product  is  established  to  be  both  existing 
(in)  and  non-different  (from  the  cause).  If  the  effect  were  non¬ 
existing  before  its  origin,  and  inhered  in  the  cause  after  the 
origin,  then  it  would  be  different  from  the  cause,  and  in  that 
case  the  declaration,  “That  by  (knowing)  which  the  unheard 
becomes  heard”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  3),  would  be  set  at  naught.  But  it 
can  be  upheld  only  by  understanding  that  the  effect  exists  before 
its  birth  and  it  is  non-different  from  the  cause. 

II  fell 

On  the  analogy  of  cloth  ^  as  well. 

19.  And  the  effect  is  non-different  from  the  cause  on  the 
analogy  of  a  piece  of  cloth. 

A  piece  of  rolled  up  cloth  is  not  recognized  as  to  whether  it 
is  cloth  or  something  else;  but  when  it  is  spread  out,  its  real 
nature  becomes  revealed  through  that  spreading  and  it  is  recog¬ 
nized  thus:  “The  thing  that  remained  rolled  up  is  a  piece  of 
cloth  to  be  sure”.  Or  even  though  it  is  cognized  as  cloth  when 
remaining  rolled  up,  its  length  and  breadth  are  not  definitely 
known;  but  when  it  is  spread  out,  it  is  known  as  possessed  of  a 
definite  length  and  breadth.  And  yet  it  is  never  known  to  be 


346  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.  19 

something  other  than  the  rolled  up  piece  of  cloth.  Similarly 
such  products  as  the  cloth  etc.  are  unmanifest  so  long  as  they 
remain  latent  in  their  causes,  viz  yarns  etc.;  but  they  are  known 
distinctly  when  they  become  manifest  as  a  result  of  the  activity 
of  such  causal  agents  as  the  shuttle,  loom,  weaver,  etc.  So  on 
the  analogy  of  the  cloth  rolled  up  and  spread  out,  the  effect  is 
non-different  from  the  cause.  This  is  the  meaning. 

*r*n  ^  stftt fk  \\r°\\ 

As  ^  also  5TPir-3nf?  (are)  the  outgoing  breath  etc. 

20.  And  this  is  so  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  outgoing  breath  etc . 

In  the  world  it  is  seen  that  when  through  praiiayama  (control 
of  breath)  the  different  forms  of  the  vital  force — outgoing  and 
incoming  breath  etc. — are  stopped,  when  these  remain  only  in 
their  causal  form,  the  mere  act  of  living  is  continued,  but  not 
so  the  other  acts  of  expansion,  contraction,  etc.  Again,  when 
those  very  forms  of  the  vital  force  become  active,  then  expan¬ 
sion,  contraction,  etc.  are  performed  in  addition  to  mere  sustain¬ 
ing  of  life.  But  the  various  forms  of  the  vital  force,  though 
distinct  from  one  another,  are  not  different  from  the  vital  force 
itself,  since  they  equally  partake  of  the  nature  of  air  (energy). 
Similarly  the  cause  is  non-different  from  the  effect.  Accordingly, 
since  the  whole  world  is  a  creation  from  and  non-different 
from  Brahman,  the  Upanisadic  assertion,  “That  by  knowing 
which  the  unheard  becomes  heard,  the  unthought  becomes 
thought,  and  the  unknown  becomes  known”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  1) 
stands  vindicated. 

Topic  7:  Non-Performance  of  Good 

WR\\\ 

^TT-oq-q^TT^  On  account  of  the  mention  of  the  other 

faults  like  not  doing  what  is  good  and  so 

on  will  arise. 

21.  Since  the  other  (individual  soul)  is  mentioned  (as  identi - 


II.  i.  2 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  347 

cal  'with  Brahman ),  faults  like  not  doing  what  is  beneficial  and 
so  on  will  arise . 

Opponent :  Consciousness  as  the  cause  is  being  challenged 
again  in  another  way.  By  depending  on  a  conscious  entity  as  the 
originator  of  the  process  of  creation,  the  door  will  be  left  open 
for  such  defects  as  non-performance  of  good. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  mention  of  the  other” — for  the  Upanisad 
mentions  the  identity  of  the  other,  viz  the  embodied  being, 
with  Brahman,  for  the  state  of  enlightenment  is  declared  thus: 
“That  is  the  Self;  That  thou  art,  O  Svetaketu”  (Ch.  VI.  viii. 
7).  Or  the  meaning  may  be  this:  The  Upanisad  mentions 
the  identity  of  the  other,  viz  Brahman,  with  the  embodied  being 
in  the  text,  “Having  created  that,  He  entered  into  that”  (Tai.  II. 
vi),  where  it  is  said  that  Brahman,  the  creator,  entered  into  the 
body  without  undergoing  any  modification,  thereby  showing 
that  Brahman  became  one  with  the  embodied  being.  And  in  the 
text,  “Let  me  manifest  name  and  form  by  Myself  entering  as 
the  individual  soul”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2),  the  supreme  Deity  alludes 
to  the  individual  being  as  His  Self,  thereby  showing  that  the 
embodied  being  is  not  different  from  Brahman.  Therefore  the 
creatorship  that  is  declared  about  Brahman  belongs  really  to  the 
embodied  being.  Accordingly,  being  an  independent  agent,  the 
soul  should  create  such  beneficial  things  as  it  likes,  and  not 
bring  about  death,  old  age,  disease,  and  such  other  hosts  of  evil 
states  which  are  harmful.  For  nobody  creates  a  prison  house  for 
himself  and  enters  into  it  unless  it  be  under  duress.  No  one 
who  is  absolutely  holy  would  accept  this  extremely  unholy 
body  as  himself.  And  even  if  he  had  done  something  causing 
pain,  he  would  voluntarily  eschew  it  and  accept  what  is  pleas¬ 
ant.  Besides,  he  would  have  remembered  thus:  “This  wonderful 
sphere,  that  the  universe  is,  has  been  created  by  me.”  For  all 
people  clearly  remember  after  accomplishing  a  notable  act, 
“This  has  been  done  by  me”.  As  a  juggler  withdraws  at  will 
and  without  effort  the  magic  spread  out  by  himself,  so  the 
embodied  being  also  would  be  able  to  withdraw  this  creation 
at  will.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  embodied  being  cannot 


348  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  21 

easily  do  away  even  with  his  own  body.  Thus  from  the  fact 
of  non-perception  of  the  performance  of  beneficial  works  and 
so  on,  it  follows  that  the  theory  of  tracing  the  world  process  to 
some  conscious  entity  is  unjustifiable.  This  is  how  the  opponent 
thinks. 


arfsrer  3  ll^ll 

^  But  greater  on  account  of  the  declara- 

tion  of  difference. 

22.  But  ( Brahman  is)  greater  (than  the  embodied  being)  on 
account  of  the  declaration  of  the  difference  (between  the  two), 

Vedantin :  The  word  “but”  rules  out  the  opposite  point  of 
view.  We  speak  of  that  entity  as  the  creator  of  the  universe 
which  is  by  nature  eternal,  pure,  intelligent,  and  which  is  some¬ 
thing  greater  than,  that  is  to  say,  different  from  the  embodied 
being.  With  regard  to  that  Brahman,  the  faults  of  not  doing 
what  is  beneficial  and  the  like  cannot  arise,  for  there  is  nothing 
beneficial  to  be  achieved  or  harmful  to  be  eschewed  by  that 
Brahman  which  is  by  nature  eternally  free.  Nor  is  there  anything 
to  debar  Its  knowledge  or  power,  since  It  is  omniscient  and 
omnipotent.  But  the  embodied  being  is  not  of  that  kind.  With 
regard  to  him  can  arise  the  fault  of  not  doing  what  is  beneficial 
and  the  like.  But  we  do  not  call  him  the  creator  of  the  world. 

How  can  it  be  so? 

“On  account  of  the  declaration  of  difference”  in,  “The  Self, 
my  dear,  is  to  be  realized — to  be  heard  of,  reflected  on,  and 
profoundly  meditated  upon”  (Bjr.  II.  iv.  5),  “He  is  to  be 
searched  for,  He  is  to  be  inquired  into”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  “O 
amiable  one,  he  then  becomes  unified  with  Existence”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  1),  “the  Self  that  is  in  the  body,  being  presided  over  by 
the  Supreme  Self”  (Bjr.  IV.  iii.  35).  Such  statements;  mentioning 
the  differences  of  the  agent,  object,  etc.,  show  that  Brahman  is 
greater  than  the  individual  soul. 

Opponent:  Has  not  the  declaration  of  non-difference  also 
been  cited  as  in,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7)  and  similar 


Hi. 23]  BRAHMA  - SOTRA  -  BHASYA  349 

texts?  How  can  both  difference  and  non-difference  be  possible, 
they  being  contradictory? 

Veddntin :  That  is  no  defect;  for  we  have  established  the 
possibility  of  this  in  the  relevant  places  on  the  analogy  of  the 
cosmic  space  and  the  little  bits  of  space  in  pots  etc.  Moreover, 
when  the  idea  of  non-difference  is  generated  by  such  declaration 
of  identity  as  “That  thou  art”,  then  the  transmigratoriness  of 
the  individual  is  removed  as  also  the  creatorship  of  Brahman; 
for  all  dualistic  dealings,  brought  about  by  unreal  ignorance,  get 
sublated  by  right  knowledge.  Then  in  that  state  where  can 
creation  come  from,  and  from  where  the  defects  like  non¬ 
accomplishment  of  beneficial  results?  We  have  stated  more  than 
once  that  the  mundane  existence,  characterized  by  the  non¬ 
accomplishment  of  beneficial  results  etc.,  is  an  error  arising 
from  the  non-recognition  of  the  difference  (from  the  soul)  of 
the  limiting  adjunct  constituted  by  the  assemblage  of  body  and 
senses  which  are  a  creation  of  name  and  form  called  up  by 
ignorance.  It  does  not  exist  in  reality.  This  (false  notion)  is  of  a 
piece  with  the  notions  that  one  has  birth,  death,  injury,  wound, 
etc.  But  so  long  as  the  dualistic  dealings  persist,  the  superiority 
of  Brahman  (to  the  individual)  known  from  texts  like,  “He  is  to 
be  sought  for,  He  is  to  be  inquired  into”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1)  rules 
out  the  presumption  of  such  faults  attaching  to  Brahman  as  the 
non-accomplishment  of  beneficial  results  etc. 

anrcifaw  1 13311 

3TW-3Trft-^{  On  the  analogy  of  stone  etc.  ^  as  also  (for 
other  reasons),  that  is  untenable. 

23 .  On  the  analogy  of  stone  etc.  as  also  for  other  reasons ,  that 
(opponent’s  view)  is  untenable . 

Moreover,  as  it  is  found  in  the  world  that,  though  stones 
possess  the  common  attributes  of  having  been  formed  from 
earth,  there  is  a  great  diversity  among  them — some  are  precious 
jewels  like  diamond,  lapis  lazuli  ( vaidurya ),  etc.,  others  are  of 
medium  value  like  crystal  etc.,  while  still  others  are  worthless 
pieces  of  stoi.e  to  be  used  for  pelting  at  dogs,  crows,  etc.  for 


350 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[II.  i.  23 


driving  them  away;  or  as  it  is  seen  that  though  all  the  seeds 
grow  on  the  same  soil,  there  is  a  great  variety  in  their  leaves, 
flowers,  fruits,  odour,  taste,  etc.,  as  is  noticed  in  sandalwood,  the 
kimpaka ,  etc.;  or  as  from  the  same  chyle  originate  different 
products  like  blood  etc.,  hair  and  down  etc.;  so  it  is  justifiable 
even  for  the  non-dual  Brahman  to  have  such  distinctions  as 
becoming  the  embodied  soul  and  God,  and  the  different  prod¬ 
ucts  (like  earth  etc.).  Therefore  “that  is  untenable”,  that  is  to 
say,  the  defects  fancied  by  the  opponent  cannot  be  sustained. 
Moreover,  this  is  untenable  since  the  Upani$ads  are  authoritative, 
since  “the  modifications  have  speech  alone  as  their  origin”  (Ch. 
VI.  i.  4),  and  since  this  is  possible  on  the  analogy  of  the  variety 
of  things  seen  in  a  dream  (though  the  dreamer  remains  the 
same).  This  is  the  idea  implied  by  “as  also”. 

Topic  8:  Creation  without  Materials 


sfaafe  IRVII 

Owing  to  the  observation  of  the  collection  of 


materials  (in  common  life)  *T  (Brahman  is)  not  (the  cause) 
^  if  this  be  the  objection,  *T  not  so,  because  (it  is 
possible)  like  milk. 


24.  If  it  be  said  that  (Brahman)  cannot  be  the  cause ,  since  one 
is  noticed  to  procure  materials  (for  the  production  of  an  object ), 
then  we  say ,  no,  for  it  is  possible  on  the  analogy  of  milk . 


Opponent :  The  assertion  made  that  conscious  Brahman  alone, 
without  a  second,  is  the  cause  of  the  universe  cannot  stand 
scrutiny. 

Why? 

“Since  one  is  noticed  to  collect  materials.”  In  common 
experience  it  is  seen  that  potters  and  others  who  make  pots, 
cloth,  etc.  engage  themselves  in  those  works  after  they  have 
provided  themselves  with  the  requisite  causal  means  by  collect¬ 
ing  such  materials  as  clay,  rod,  wheel,  string,  and  so  on.  And 
you  maintain  that  Brahman  is  without  any  help.  But  how  can 
there  be  any  creatorship  for  Brahman  unless  It  has  procured 


II.  i.  25] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


351 


an  assemblage  of  other  accessories?  Therefore  Brahman  is  not 
the  cause  of  the  universe. 

Vedantin :  That  fault  does  not  arise,  since  on  the  analogy  of 
milk  it  can  be  reasonably  maintained  that  this  can  happen  on 
account  of  the  peculiar  nature  of  the  thing  itself.  As  in  the 
world,  milk  or  water  gets  transformed  into  curds  or  ice  by 
itself  without  depending  on  any  extraneous  accessory,  so  it  can 
be  here  as  well. 

Opponent :  Even  when  milk  etc.  turn  into  curds  etc.  they 
have,  to  depend  on  external  factors  like  heat  etc.  So  how  can  it 
be  said,  “For  it  is  possible  on  the  analogy  of  milk”? 

Vedantin:  That  creates  no  difficulty,  for  whichever  may  be 
the  transformation  and  whatever  its  extent,  it  is  milk  itself  that 
undergoes  that  modification,  while  heat  etc.  merely  accelerate 
the  process.  If  it  had  not  any  intrinsic  capacity  to  turn  into  curds, 
then  it  could  not  have  been  forcibly  transformed  into  curds  even 
by  heat  etc.;  for  neither  air  nor  space  can  be  forced  by  heat  etc. 
to  become  curds.  An  accession  of  paraphernalia  only  perfects 
the  capacity  of  milk.  Brahman,  however,  is  possessed  of  the 
fullest  power,  and  It  has  not  to  depend  on  anything  else  for 
imparting  an  excellence  (to  that  power).  In  support  of  this  is  the 
Upanisadic  text:  “He  has  no  work  and  no  instrument;  none  is 
seen  either  as  equal  or  superior  to  Him.  His  supreme  power  is 
heard  of  as  of  various  kinds.  And  His  knowledge,  power,  and 
action  are  natural”  (Sv.  VI.  8).  Hence  even  though  Brahman 
is  one,  it  is  possible  for  It,  by  virtue  of  the  possession  of  diverse 
powers,  to  be  transformed  variously  on  the  analogy  of  milk  etc. 

iRK.it 

As  in  the  case  of  gods  and  others  3ffa  as  well 
in  this  world. 

25.  Also  (Brahman  can  create  without  extraneous  help)  like 
gods  and  others  ( as  is  seen )  in  this  world. 

Opponent :  It  may  be  granted  that  insentient  things  like  milk 
etc.  turn  into  curds  etc.  without  the  help  of  external  means,  it 
being  a  matter  of  experience;  but  conscious  beings  like  potters 


352  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  [II.  i.  25 

and  others  are  seen  to  depend  on  the  requisite  means  while 
engaging  in  their  respective  works.  So  how  can  Brahman,  con¬ 
scious  as  It  is,  act  without  help? 

Vedantin :  We  say,  it  can  be  so  “as  in  the  case  of  gods  and 
others”.  For  on  the  authority  of  the  mantras  and  (other) 
corroborative  statements  (in  scriptures),  anecdotes,  and  mythol¬ 
ogies,  it  is  a  known  fact  “in  this  world”  that  the  gods,  manes, 
Tfis,  and  others,  very  powerful  and  sentient  as  they  are,  create 
by  themselves  through  mere  will  and  without  any  external  help, 
many  such  things  as  bodies,  palaces,  chariots,  etc.,  of  various 
shapes,  because  they  are  possessed  of  special  powers.  The  spider 
also  creates  its  threads  by  itself;  the  crane  conceives  without 
mating  by  hearing  merely  the  roar  of  clouds;  and  the  lotus 
stalk  moves  from  one  lake  to  another  without  waiting  for  any 
vehicle.  Similarly,  Brahman,  conscious  though  It  is,  may  well 
create  the  universe  by  Itself  without  looking  for  external  means. 

If  the  opponent  argues  thus:  When  you  take  up  your  gods 
and  others  as  illustrations  for  Brahman,  they  do  not  bear  any 
similarity  to  Brahman  which  is  sought  to  be  illustrated.  For  the 
insentient  bodies  themselves  of  the  gods,  and  not  their  conscious 
souls,  furnish  the  material  for  the  manifestation  of  their  divine 
powers  in  the  shape  of  other  bodies  etc.  In  the  case  of  the 
spider,  it  is  the  saliva  that  becomes  solidified  as  a  result  of 
eating  smaller  insects  and  thus  turns  into  thread.  The  crane 
conceives  by  hearing  the  roar  of  clouds.  And  the  lotus  stalk 
moves,  under  the  impulsion  of  its  consciousness,  from  lake  to 
lake  with  the  help  of  its  body  like  a  creeper  climbing  up  a 
tree;  not  that  the  insentient  lotus  starts  moving  by  itself  to 
another  lake.  Hence  these  analogies  do  not  apply  in  the  case 
of  Brahman. 

Vedantin :  To  him  one  can  say:  That  is  no  defect.  For  the 
point  emphasized  is  the  mere  difference  from  the  illustrations 
of  the  potters  and  others.  Though  the  potters  and  the  gods  and 
others  are  equally  sentient  beings,  the  potters  depend  on  external 
accessories  for  undertaking  their  work,  whereas  the  gods  and 
others  do  not.  Similarly,  Brahman,  though  conscious,  will  not 
depend  on  external  means.  It  is  merely  this  much  that  we  imply 
by  citing  the  cases  of  the  gods  and  others.  Therefore  what  is 


II.i.26]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  353 

implied  (by  the  aphorist)  is  that  there  cannot  be  any  such 
invariable  rule  that  the  power  of  everybody  must  conform  to 
that  of  somebody  we  are  familiar  with. 

Topic  9:  Wholesale  Transformation 

It  is  established  that  Brahman — conscious,  one,  and  without  a 
second — becomes  the  cause  of  the  universe  through  a  trans¬ 
formation  that  needs  no  extraneous  help  as  in  the  case  of  milk 
etc.,  or  of  gods  and  others,  without  any  external  help.  But  an 
objection  is  being  raised  again  with  a  view  to  placing  the  pur¬ 
port  of  the  scriptures  beyond  cavil: 

ir^ii 

There  will  be  the  contingency  of  wholesale  trans- 
formation  or  fa  ^ m the  violation  of  Upani$adic 
texts  about  partlessness. 

26.  (If  Brahman  changes  into  the  world,  then)  there  will  arise 
the  contingency  of  either  wholesale  transformation  or  the  viola¬ 
tion  of  the  texts  about  partlessness . 

Opponent :  There  arises  the  contingency  of  the  whole  of 
Brahman  becoming  transformed  into  creation,  since  It  has  no 
parts.  Had  Brahman  been  composite  like  the  earth  etc.,  one  of 
Its  parts  could  change  while  the  other  would  remain  intact. 
But  Brahman  is  partless  as -is  known  from  such  Upanisadic  texts 
as,  “Partless,  actionless,  peaceful,  faultless,  taintless”  (Sv.  VI.  19), 
“Puru$a  is  transcendental;  He  is  coextensive  with  all  that  is 
external  and  internal  and  He  is  birthless”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  “This 
great,  endless,  infinite  Reality  is  but  pure  Intelligence”  (Br.  II. 
IV.  12),  “This  is  that  Self  that  is  known  as  ‘Not  this,  not  this*  ” 
(Br.  III.  ix.  26),  “Not  gross,  not  minute”  (Br.  III.  viii.  8),  and 
others  which  deny  all  distinctions.  Accordingly,  it  being  impos¬ 
sible  to  change  partially,  there  arises  the  question  of  changing 
wholly,  in  which  case  you  cut  at  the  very  root.  And  the  instruc¬ 
tion  about  seeing  (i.e.  the  realization)  of  Brahman  becomes 
useless  since  the  created  things  can  be  seen  without  any  special 
effort,  and  there  remains  no  other  Brahman  outside  these  prod¬ 
ucts.  Besides,  the  texts  about  the  birthlessness  of  Brahman  will 
23 


354  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.  26 

be  violated.  If,  however,  Brahman  be  accepted  to  be  composite 
just  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  this  difficulty,  then  this  will  militate 
against  the  texts  cited  above  about  the  partlessness  of  Brahman. 
Furthermore,  Brahman  will  become  non-eternal  if  It  has  parts. 
Thus  this  theory  cannot  be  substantiated  from  any  point  of 
view.  This  is  the  objection. 

IRV9II 

$  But  on  the  Upani$adic  authority  (Brah¬ 

man)  being  known  from  Upani$ads  alone. 

27.  But  (this  has  to  be  accepted)  on  the  authority  of  the 
Upanifads,  for  Brahman  is  known  from  the  Upani$ads  alone . 

Veddntin :  By  the  word  “but”  the  objection  is  ruled  out.  No 
defect  certainly  attaches  to  our  point  of  view.  For  instance, 
there  is  no  possibility  of  change  (of  Brahman)  as  a  whole. 

Whence  is  it  so? 

“On  the  authority  of  Upani$adic  texts.”  The  Upani$ads  speak 
as  much  about  transcendence  of  all  modifications  by  Brahman, 
as  they  do  about  the  creation  of  the  universe  from  It;  for  the 
material  cause  and  its  product  are  mentioned  separately  in  such 
texts  as,  “That  Deity  that  was  such,  deliberated,  ‘Let  this  be 
so,  that  I  manifest  name  and  form  after  Myself  entering  into 
these  three  gods  as  the  individual  soul’”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2),  “That 
much  is  His  glory.  But  Purasa  is  higher  than  that.  All  beings  are 
but  one  foot  of  His,  But  His  three  immortal  feet  exist  in  heaven” 
(Ch.  III.  xii.  6).  This  also  follows  from  the  declaration  of  the 
heart  as  His  seat,  and  absorption  in  Existence  (in  sleep).  Had 
Brahman  wholly  evolved  as  this  creation,  it  would  have  been 
unreasonable  to  speak  of  any  speciality  in  the  state  of  deep 
sleep,  as  is  done  in,“0  amiable  one,  he  then  becomes  absorbed 
in  Existence”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1),  for  in  that  case  an  individual 
would  have  been  ever  in  union  with  the  transmuted  Brahman, 
so  that  there  would  have  been  no  unchanged  Brahman  left  over 
(into  whioh  to  merge).  This  follows  also  from  the  denial  of 
Brahman  as  an  object  of  the  senses,  whereas  all  transformations 
are  objects  of  perception.  Hence  Brahman  does  exist  as  an 


II.  i.  27]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  355 

unchanged  Entity.  There  is  no  violation  of  the  texts  about 
partlessness,  since  partlessness  is  accepted  on  account  of  its  very 
“mention  in  the  Upani?ads”,  and  the  Upani$ads  are  the  only 
authority  about  It,  but  not  so  are  the  senses  etc.  Hence  It  has 
to  be  accepted  just  as  It  is  presented  by  the  Upani$ads.  The 
Upani§ads  prove  both  the  facts  for  Brahman — the  non-trans¬ 
formation  of  Brahman  as  a  whole  and  partlessness.  Even  the 
things  of  this  world  like  gems,  incantations,  herbs,  and  so  on, 
are  seen  to  possess  many  powers  capable  of  producing  incom¬ 
patible  effects  under  the  influence  of  a  variety  of  space  (environ¬ 
ment),  time,  and  cause.  And  even  these  powers  can  be  known 
not  from  mere  reasoning  but  from  such  instruction  as,  “Such  a 
thing  has  such  kinds  of  potency  with  the  aid  of  such  things,  on 
such  things,  and  for  such  purposes”.  So  what  need  has  one  to 
argue  that  the  nature  of  Brahman,  whose  power  is  beyond  all 
thought,  cannot  be  ascertained  unless  it  be  through  the  Vedas? 
So  also  it  has  been  said  by  an  author  of  a  Puraoa,  “Do  not 
bring  those  things  within  the  range  of  argumentation  which  are 
beyond  thought.  The  nature  of  a  thing  beyond  thought  consists 
in  its  being  other  than  the  things  within  Nature.”  Hence  a 
supersensuous  thing  is  truly  known  from  the  Vedic  source 
alone. 

Opponent:  Even  the  Vedas  cannot  make  us  understand  a 
self-contradictory  thing,  when  they  say  for  instance,  that  the 
partless  Brahman  changes  (into  the  world),  but  not  wholly.  If 
Brahman  be  partless,  then  either  It  will  not  change  at  all,  or 
else  It  will  change  wholly.  If,  however,  it  be  said  that  Brahman 
changes  in  some  aspects,  but  remains  intact  in  others,  then  from 
this  imagination  of  aspects,  Brahman  will  surely  become 
heterogeneous.  It  is  only  when  a  contradiction  appears  in  the 
context  of  some  action,  as  for  instance  with  regard  to  the  two 
injunctions  “One  should  take  up  the  (vessel  called)  §o<Jasin 
during  the  Atiratra  sacrifice”,  “One  should  not  take  up  the 
§odasin  during  the  Atiratra  sacrifice”,  that  one  has  to  resort  to 
an  optional  course  for  resolving  the  contradiction;  for  the  per¬ 
formance  of  an  act  is  dependent  on  the*  person  concerned.  But 
the  contradiction  cannot  be  resolved  here  even  by  taking  shelter 
under  option,  since  a  thing,  as  such,  is  not  dependent  on 


356  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [ILi.27 

any  person.  Hence  this  (contradiction)  is  difficult  to  reconcile. 

Vedantin :  That  is  nothing  damaging,  since  it  is  admitted 
that  this  difference  of  aspects  is  created  by  ignorance.  For  a 
thing  does  not  become  multiformed  just  because  aspects  are 
imagined  on  it  through  ignorance.  Not  that  the  moon,  perceived 
to  be  many  by  a  man  with  blurred  vision  ( tirmra — diplopia), 
becomes  really  so.  Brahman  becomes  subject  to  all  kinds  of 
(phenomenal)  actions  like  transformation,  on  account  of  the 
differences  of  aspects,  constituted  by  name  and  form,  which 
remain  either  differentiated  or  non-differentiated,  which  cannot 
be  determined  either  as  real  or  unreal,  and  which  are  imagined 
through  ignorance.  In  Its  real  aspect  Brahman  remains  unchang¬ 
ed  and  beyond  all  phenomenal  actions.  And  since  the  differences 
of  name  and  form,  brought  about  by  ignorance,  are  ushered 
into  being  through  mere  speech,  the  partlessness  of  Brahman  is 
not  violated.  Besides,  this  text  about  transformation  is  not  meant 
to  establish  transformation  as  a  fact,  for  no  fruit  is  seen  to  result 
from  such  a  knowledge.  But  this  is  meant  to  establish  the  fact 
that  all  this  is  in  essence  one  with  Brahman  that  is  beyond  all 
phenomenal  processes;  for  some  fruit  is  seen  to  result  from 
such  a  realization.  Thus  after  starting  with,  “That  which  is  the 
Self  is  known  as  ‘Not  this,  not  this’  ”,  it  is  said,  “O  Janaka, 
you  have  certainly  attained  that  which  is  beyond  fear”  (Bj\  IV. 
ii.  4).  Hence  there  is  no  possibility  of  any  defect  arising  from 
our  point  of  view. 

3nc*Tft  =shr  fafonsr  f|  ii^ii 

Because  (it  occurs)  thus  IcHPi  in  the  soul  ^  as 
well;  ^  and  (creations)  faP^i :  of  diverse  kinds  (occur  in  the 
cases  of  gods  and  others). 

28.  Because  it  occurs  thus  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul 
as  well,  and  creations  of  diverse  kinds  occur  in  the  cases  of 
gods  and  others . 

Moreover,  there  is  no  occasion  for  dispute  here  as  to  how 
there  can  be  creation  of  various  kinds  in  the  same  Brahman 
without  changing  Its  nature;  for  we  read  in  the  Upani$ad  that  a 


II.  i.  29]  BRAHMA- SOTRA-BH  A$YA  357 

diverse  creation  occurs  in  the  same  soul  in  dream  without  any 
change  of  nature:  “There  are  no  chariots,  nor  animals  to  be 
yoked  to  them,  nor  roads  there,  but  he  creates  the  chariots, 
animals,  and  roads”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  10).  In  the  world  also  it  is 
seen  in  the  case  of  gods,  as  also  jugglers  and  others  that  various 
kinds  of  creation  of  elephants  and  so  on  take  place  without 
any  destruction  of  their  nature.  Similarly  even  in  the  same 
Brahman  there  can  be  a  diverse  creation  without  any  destruc¬ 
tion  of  Its  nature. 


irs.ii 

29.  And  because  the  opponent’s  own  pomt  of  view  is  equally 
vitiated. 

The  others  also  have  the  same  defect  attaching  to  their  own 
point  of  view.  For  the  view  of  the  believers  in  Pradhana  is  also 
the  same,  viz  that  Pradhana  which  is  partless,  limitless,  attribute¬ 
less  (devoid  of  sound),  and  so  on,  becomes  the  cause  of  a 
product  that  is  composite,  limited,  and  possessed  of  sound  etc. 
In  that  case  also  arises  the  possibility  of  Pradhana  changing  as  a 
whole,  since  Pradhana  is  partless;  else  there  arises  the  possibility 
of  the  theory  of  partlessness  being  contradicted. 

Opponent :  But  they  do  not  certainly  believe  in  a  partless 
Pradhana.  For  there  are  its  three  constituents — sattva,  rajas ,  and 
tamas  (representing  intelligence,  activity,  and  inertia);  Pradhana 
is  the  state  of  their  balance.  Pradhana  has  parts  on  account  of 
these  constituents. 

Vedantin  :  The  defect  under  consideration  cannot  be  avoided 
by  (accepting)  this  kind  of  heterogeneity,  for  each  one  of 
these  sattva ,  rajas,  and  tamas  is  equally  partless;  and  each  one 
of  these  individually,  in  co-operation  with  the  other  two, 
becomes  the  material  cause  of  a  creation  (which  must  be) 
homogeneous  with  itself.  In  this  way  arises  the  predicament  of 
their  own  view  being  equally  open  to  these  charges.18 

“The  three  qualities  acting  as  a  whole  cannot  produce  a  hetero¬ 
geneous  world,  so  that  each  must  have  some  free  hand  in  creation.  Now 
does  each  change  wholly  or  partially?  Either  point  of  view  is  open  to 
the  above  objection. 


358  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  i.  29 

Opponent :  In  keeping  with  the  maxim  that  reasoning  has 
no  conclusiveness,  Pradhana  has  to  be  accepted  as  heterogeneous 
(by  discarding  the  inconclusive  arguments  about  Pradhana’s 
partlessness). 

Vedantin :  Even  so  there  arises  the  contingency  of  such 
defects  as  impermanence  etc. 

Again,  if  it  be  your  contention  that  the  various  powers  of 
Pradhana,  inferable  from  the  diversity  seen  in  its  products,  are 
its  constituents,  then  such  powers  can  be  equally  upheld  by 
the  believers  in  Brahman. 

Similarly  also  in  the  case  of  the  believers  in  atoms,  when  one 
atom  unites  with  another,  then  since  an  atom  has  no  parts,  it 
must  unite  as  a  whole,  so  that  no  magnitude  will  arise  from 
that  combination;19  and  hence  this  will  end  in  an  atom  only. 
Or  if  it  should  unite  in  one  part,  then  the  theory  that  the  atom 
has  no  part  will  fall  through.  So  the  fault  vitiates  equally  their 
own  point  of  view  as  well.  And  since  the  defect  is  shared 
equally,  it  should  not  be  directed  against  one  of  the  disputants 
(viz  the  Vedantin)  only.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  believer  in 
Brahman  has  freed  his  own  point  of  view  from  this  defect. 

Topic  10:  Possession  of  all  Powers 

And  possessed  of  all  (powers)  it  having 

been  thus  revealed. 

30 .  Moreover  (the  Deity  is)  possessed  of  all  (powers),  it 
having  been  revealed  thus  (in  the  Upani$ads). 

It  has  been  said  earlier  that  a  kaleidoscopic  phenomenal  crea¬ 
tion  can  very  well  stem  out  from  the  same  Brahman  on  account 
of  Its  being  endowed  with  multifarious  powers. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  is  it  known  that  the  supreme  Brahman 
is  endowed  with  diverse  powers? 

Vedantin :  That  is  being  answered:  “The  supreme  Deity  is 

19  The  combination  of  the  second  with  the  first  leaves  the  first  alone, 
which  has  no  dimension. 


II.  i.  31]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  359 

possessed  of  all  powers,  it  having  been  revealed  thus.”  It  has 
to  be  accepted  that  the  supreme  Deity  is  endowed  with  all 
powers. 

How  does  this  follow? 

Because  so  it  is  revealed.  Thus  the  Upani$ads  show  that  the 
supreme  Deity  is  possessed  of  all  the  powers  in  such  passages 
as,  “He  is  the  doer  of  all  (good)  actions;  He  is  possessed  of  all 
(good)  desires,  all  (good)  smells,  all  (good)  tastes,  and  He 
pervades  all  this.  He  is  without  the  organ  of  speech,  and  has 
no  hankering”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  4),  “His  desires  are  true,  and  His 
will  is  inviolable”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1).  “He  who  is  all-knowing 
in  general  and  particular”  (Mu.  I.  i.  9),  “Under  the  mighty  rule 
of  this  Immutable,  O  Gargi,  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  held  in 
their  positions”  (B{\  III.  viii.  9). 

\m\\ 

Owing  to  the  non-possession  of  organs  ^  (Brahman 
is)  not  (the  agent)  ^  if  such  be  the  objection,  that 
(objection)  was  answered. 

31 .  If  it  be  argued  that  (Brahman  cannot  act)  on  account  of 
absence  of  organs ,  that  was  answered  earlier . 

Opponent :  It  may  be  so.  But  the  scripture  teaches  that  the 
supreme  Deity  is  without  organs,  as  in  such  texts,  “without 
eyes  or  ears,  without  the  vocal  organ  or  mind”  (Bf.  III.  viii.  8). 
How  can  He  be  able  to  perform  action  even  though  omnip¬ 
otent?  For  it  is  known  that  even  though  the  gods  are  sentient 
and  equipped  with  all  kinds  of  power,  still  they  can  accom¬ 
plish  their  respective  duties  only  when  they  are  in  possession  of 
bodies  and  organs  in  a  physical  context.  Now  how  can  the 
Deity  from  whom  all  distinction  is  ruled  out  by  saying,  “Not 
this,  not  this”  (B^.  IV.  v.  15),  become  associated  with  all  kinds 
of  powers? 

Vedantin  :  Whatever  can  be  stated  in  this  matter  has  already 
been  stated  earlier  (B.  S.  II.  i.  27).  This  supreme  and  sublime 
Brahman  is  to  be  known  from  the  Vedas  alone,  but  not  from 
reasoning.  Moreover,  there  cannot  be  any  such  rule  that  since 


360  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [ILL  31 

somebody  is  seen  to  have  some  power  in  some  way,  another 
should  also  have  it  in  the  same  way.  Moreover,  this  also  has 
already  been  stated  that  even  though  all  distinctions  are  denied 
in  Brahman,  still  It  can  have  an  accession  of  all  powers  owing 
to  the  presence  of  a  variety  of  aspects  conjured  up  by  ignorance. 
In  support  of  this  is  the  scripture,  “He  moves  and  grasps  even 
though  He  is  without  feet  and  hands,  He  sees  without  eyes, 
and  hears  without  ears”  (§v.  III.  19),  which  shows  the  posses¬ 
sion  of  all  kinds  of  power  by  Brahman,  even  though  It  is  devoid 
of  organs. 


Topic  11:  Need  of  Motive 

That  a  conscious  entity  can  be  the  creator  of  the  universe  is 
being  challenged  again  in  another  way  (by  the  opponent ): 

*  ll^ll 

*T  Not  (the  cause)  spffaT'T-^r'Ilq,  owing  to  the  need  of  motive. 

32.  (Brahman  is)  not  the  cause,  owing  to  the  ?ieed  of  some 
motive  (for  creation). 

The  conscious  supreme  Self  can  never  create  this  sphere  of 
the  universe. 

Why? 

“Owing  to  the  need  of  motive”  for  action.  It  is  a  matter  of 
common  experience  that  an  intelligent  man  whose  engagement 
in  work  is  preceded  by  forethought,  does  not  start  any  activity, 
easy  of  performance  though  it  be,  unless  it  is  conducive  to  his 
purpose.  What  to  speak  of  an  undertaking  requiring  stupendous 
effort?  And  there  is  an  Upani$adic  text  confirming  this  well- 
known  human  fact:  “It  is  not  for  the  sake  of  all,  my  dear,  that 
all  is  loved,  but  for  one’s  own  sake  that  all  is  loved”  (Bf.  II. 
iv.  5).  The  creation  of  this  spherical  universe,  consisting  of  a 
multiple  conglomeration  of  high  and  low  things  is  a  huge  task. 
Even  if  this  effort  be  imagined  to  be  conducive  to  some  pur¬ 
pose  of  the  conscious  supreme  Self,  then  the  mention  in  the 
Vedas  of  Its  contentment  will  be  contradicted.  Alternatively  if 
there  be  no  purpose,  then  there  will  be  no  activity.  It  may, 


II.  i.33)  BRAHMA -SCTR A -BHASYA  361 

however,  be  argued  that  it  is  a  matter  of  experience  that  a  mad 
man,  sentient  though  he  is,  acts  on  account  of  the  derangement 
of  his  brain,  even  where  he  has  nothing  to  gain;  and  on  this 
analogy  the  supreme  Self  too  can  have  action.  But  on  that 
assumption  the  mention  of  His  omniscience  in  the  Vedas  will 
be  contradicted.  Hence  it  is  incongruous  to  hold  that  creation 
stems  out  from  an  intelligent  being. 

wtecJrT  WWW 

^  But  like  what  is  seen  in  the  world 

(creation  is)  a  mere  pastime. 

33.  But  (creation  for  Brahman  is)  a  mere  pastime  like  what  is 
seen  in  the  world. 

Veddntin :  The  objection  is  rebutted  by  the  word  “but”.  As 
in  the  world  it  is  seen  that  though  a  king  or  some  councillor  of 
the  king  who  has  got  all  his  desires  fulfilled,  may  still,  without 
any  aim  in  view,  indulge  in  activities  in  the  forms  of  sports  and 
pastimes,  as  a  sort  of  diversion,  or  as  inhalation,  exhalation,  etc. 
proceed  spontaneously  without  depending  on  any  external 
motive,  so  also  God  can  have  activities  of  the  nature  of  mere 
pastime  out  of  His  spontaneity  without  any  extraneous  motive. 
For  any  motive  imputed  to  God  can  have  neither  the  support 
of  reason  nor  of  the  Vedas.  Nor  can  one’s  nature  be  called  into 
question.  Although  the  creation  of  this  sphere  of  the  universe 
appears  to  us  to  be  a  stupendous  task,  yet  to  God  it  is  a  mere 
pastime,  because  His  power  is  infinite.  Even  though  people 
may  fancy  that  sport  also  has  some  subtle  motive  behind  it, 
still  no  motive  can  be  thought  of  here,  since  the  Vedas  declare 
that  He  has  all  desires  fulfilled.  Again,  there  can  be  neither 
inactivity,  nor  any  mad  activity,  since  there  are  the  Vedic  texts 
about  creation  and  omniscience.  And  yet  the  Vedic  statement 
of  creation  does  not  relate  to  any  reality,  for  it  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  such  a  text  is  valid  within  the  range  of  activities 
concerned  with  name  and  form  called  up  by  ignorance,  and  it 
is  meant  for  propounding  the  fact  that  everything  has  Brahman 
as  its  Self. 


362  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  i.  34 

Topic  12:  Partiality  and  Cruelty 

On  the  maxim  of  driving  a  pole  deeper20,  the  view  that  God 
is  the  cause  of  the  origin  etc.  of  the  universe  is  being  challenged 
again,  in  order  to  make  the  proposition  all  the  more  well 
established. 

^  %  ssfafa  113*11 

A _  A  P  .y 

Partiality  and  cruelty  *T  (do)  not  (occur) 
owing  to  consideration  of  other  factors^  for  tTSfT so 
(the  Vedas)  show. 

34.  No  partiality  and  cruelty  ( can  be  charged  against  God ) 
because  of  (His)  taking  other  factors  into  consideration.  For 
so  the  Vedas  show. 

Opponent :  God  cannot  reasonably  be  the  cause  of  the  world. 
Why? 

For  that  would  lead  to  the  possibility  of  partiality  and  cruelty. 
For  it  can  be  reasonably  concluded  that  God  has  passion  and 
hatred  like  some  ignoble  persons,  for  He  creates  an  unjust  world 
by  making  some,  e.g.  gods  and  others,  experience  happiness, 
some,  e.g.  animals  etc.,  experience  extreme  misery  and  some, 
e.g.  human  beings,  experience  moderate  happiness  and  sorrow. 
Hence  there  will  be  a  nullification  of  God’s  nature  of 
extreme  purity,  (unchangeability),  etc.,  that  are  declared  in 
the  Vedas  and  Smrtis.  And  owing  to  infliction  of  misery  and 
destruction  on  all  creatures,  God  will  be  open  to  the  charge  of 
pitilessness  and  extreme  cruelty,  abhorred  even  by  a  villain. 
Thus  on  account  of  the  possibility  of  partiality  and  cruelty,  God 
is  not  an  agent. 

Vedantin :  To  this  we  say,  “No  partiality  or  cruelty  can  be 
charged  against  God.” 

How  can  this  be  so? 

“Because  of  His  taking  other  factors  into  consideration.”  Had 

"In  soft  earth  a  pole  is  first  forced  in  and  then  pulled  out  to  force  it 
down  still  deeper.  This  process  is  repeated  many  times  till  the  pole  reaches 
firm  ground  and  is  held  fast  in  position. 


H.i.35]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  363 

God  created  this  erratic  world  by  Himself,  irrespective  of 
other  factors,  He  would  be  open  to  these  charges  of  partiality 
and  cruelty.  But  in  His  isolation  (from  these)  He  has  no  crea- 
torship,  for  God  makes  this  unequal  creation  by  taking  the  help 
of  other  factors. 

What  factors  does  He  take  into  consideration? 

We  say  that  these  are  merit  and  demerit.  No  fault  attaches  to 
God,  since  this  unequal  creation  is  brought  about  in  conformity 
with  the  virtues  and  vices  of  the  creatures  that  are  about  to  be 
bom.  Rather,  God  is  to  be  compared  to  rain.  Just  as  rainfall  is 
a  common  cause  for  the  growth  of  paddy,  barley,  etc.,  the 
special  reasons  for  the  differences  of  paddy,  barley,  etc.,  being 
the  individual  potentiality  of  the  respective  seeds,  similarly  God 
is  the  common  cause  for  the  birth  of  gods,  men,  and  others, 
while  the  individual  fruits  of  works  associated  with  the  individ¬ 
ual  creatures  are  the  uncommon  causes  for  the  creation  of  the 
differences  among  the  gods,  men,  and  others.  Thus  God  is  not 
open  to  the  defects  of  partiality  and  cruelty,  since  He  takes 
other  factors  into  consideration. 

How,  again,  is  it  known  that  God  creates  this  world  of  high, 
low,  and  medium  conditions  in  accordance  with  other  factors? 

“For  so  the  Vedas  show”  in,  “It  is  He  indeed  who  makes 
him  perform  virtuous  deeds  whom  He  would  raise  high  above 
these  worlds;  and  it  is  He  indeed  who  makes  him  perform 
vicious  deeds  whom  He  would  cast  below  these  worlds”  (Kau. 
III.  8),  “It  becomes  virtuous  through  good  acts,  and  vicious 
through  evil  acts”  (Bj\  III.  ii.  13,  IV.  iv.  5).  The  Smjti  also 
shows  that  God’s  dispensation  of  favour  and  disfavour  is  con¬ 
tingent  on  the  specific  merit  of  the  work  done  by  each  creature, 
e.g.  “In  whatever  way  men  worship  Me,  in  the  same  way  do  I 
fulfil  their  desires”  (Gita,  IV.  11),  and  other  texts  of  a  similar 
import. 

*T  Not  (so)  on  account  of  karma  remaining 

undifferentiated  ^  if  this  be  the  objection,  ^  not  so, 

because  of  the  beginninglessness  (of  the  trans- 
migratory  state). 


364  BRAHMA-  SCTRA-BHA$YA  [ILL  35 

35.  If  it  be  argued  that  it  is  not  possible  (to  take  Karma — 
merit  and  demerit — into  consideration  in  the  beginning ),  since 
the  fruits  of  'work  remain  still  undifferentiated,  then  'we  say,  no, 
since  the  transmigratory  state  has  no  beginning. 

Opponent :  There  could  have  been  no  karma  (result  of  work) 
before  creation,  in  accordance  with  which  a  diverse  universe 
could  have  emerged;  for  nondifferentiation  is  emphasized  in  the 
text,  “O  amiable  one,  in  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  Existence, 
one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1).  It  is  only  after  creation 
that  results  of  work,  depending  on  the  diversification  into 
bodies  etc.,  could  be  possible,  and  the  diversification  into  bodies 
could  be  possible  by  depending  on  the  results  of  work.  This 
would  lead  to  the  fallacy  of  mutual  dependence  (logical  seesaw). 
Thus,  well  may  God  become  active  by  depending  on  the  fruits 
of  work  after  the  creation  of  multiplicity.  But  before  this 
emergence  of  diversity  it  would  come  to  this  that  the  first 
creation  would  perforce  be  without  any  variety,  since  the  fruits 
of  work  bringing  about  differentiation  would  be  absent. 

Vedantin  :  That  is  no  defect,  since  the  transmigratory  state  has 
no  beginning.  This  defect  would  have  arisen  if  transmigra¬ 
tion  had  a  beginning.  But  if  that  state  has  no  beginning,  there 
is  nothing  contradictory  for  the  fruits  of  work  and  the  variety 
in  creation  to  act  as  cause  and  effect  of  each  other  on  the 
analogy  of  the  seed  and  the  sprout. 

How,  again,  is  it  known  that  this  transmigratory  state  has  no 
beginning? 

To  this  the  answer  is: 

waft  ^  \r%\n 

^  3TPr  Moreover  this  is  logical  W  and  is  met 

with. 

36.  Moreover,  this  is  logical,  and  (so)  it  is  met  'with  (in  the 
scriptures). 


And  it  is  logical  for  the  transmigratory  existence  to  have  no 


II.  i.  36]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  365 

beginning;  for  had  it  emerged  capriciously  all  of  a  sudden,  then 
there  would  have  been  the  predicament  of  freed  souls  also  being 
reborn  here,  as  also  the  contingency  of  results  accruing  from 
non-existing  causes,  for  the  differences  in  happiness  and  misery 
would  have  no  logical  explanation.  It  has  been  pointed  out 
already  that  God  is  not  the  cause  of  inequality,  nor  is  ignorance 
by  itself  a  source  of  this,  it  being  homogeneous.  Ignorance  can 
at  best  become  the  creator  of  inequality  in  consequence  of  the 
fruits  of  work,  which  are  acquired  as  a  result  of  the  influence 
of  past  impressions  of  the  three  infatuations — love,  hatred, 
and  delusion.  The  fallacy  of  mutual  dependence  docs  not  arise 
from  the  impossibility  of  bodies  being  created  without  karma 
and  karma  being  performed  without  bodies;  for  if  creation  is 
beginningless,  all  this  becomes  reasonable  on  the  analogy  of  the 
seed  and  the  sprout,  and  hence  there  will  be  no  defect. 

And  we  realize  the  beginninglessness  of  creation  from  the 
Vedas  and  the  Smjtis.  In  the  Vedas,  for  instance,  occurs  the 
text,  “Myself  entering  into  this  as  the  embodied  soul  (Jiva-atma 
— living  being)”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2).  Referring  to  the  beginning  of 
creation,  this  text  speaks  of  the  embodied  soul  as  the  “living 
being”  on  account  of  its  sustaining  life,  and  thereby  it  shows 
that  creation  had  no  beginning;  for  if  creation  had  a  beginning 
then,  since  the  soul  had  no  life  to  sustain  (at  that  time),  why 
should  the  “living  being”  have  been  referred  to  in  that  text 
through  the  word  jiva  (living  one)  which  conies  into  use  from 
the  fact  of  supporting  the  life  process  ( jivana )?  It  cannot 
be  that  the  term  jiva  is  used  in  anticipation  that  it  will 
support  life  in  future;  for  an  existing  relationship  is  stronger 
than  a  future  one,  inasmuch  as  the  former  is  an  accomplished 
fact.  And  the  mantra  text,  “The  Ordainer  created  the  sun  and 
moon  like  those  of  the  previous  cycles”  (R.  V.  X.  cxc.  3)  shows 
the  existence  of  earlier  cycles  of  creation.  In  the  Smjti  also 
the  transmigratory  state  is  noticed  to  be  without  beginning,  as 
in,  “Its  form  is  not  here  perceived  as  such,  neither  its  end,  nor 
its  origin,  nor  its  continuance”  (Gita  XV.  3).  The  conclusion 
made  in  the  Puranas  also  is  that  the  past  and  future  cycles  of 
creation  are  numberless. 


366 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAJYA  [II.  i.  37 

Topic  13:  Propriety  of  all  the  Characteristics 


u^u 

57.  And  Brahman  is  the  cause  on  account  of  the  propriety  of 
all  the  characteristics  (of  a  cause  in  It). 

After  it  has  been  ascertained  that  the  Vedas  have  for  their 
purport  the  conscious  Brahman  as  the  efficient  and  material 
cause  of  the  universe,  the  teacher  (Vyasa)  refuted  the  objec¬ 
tions  raised  by  others  on  such  grounds  as  the  difference  between 
Brahman  and  the  world.  Now  he  concludes  the  subject  mainly 
concerned  with  the  establishment  of  his  own  point  of  view, 
before  he  commences  the  subject  mainly  concerned  with 
demolishing  the  opposing  points  of  view  (B.  S.  II.  ii).  This 
philosophy  based  on  the  Upani§ads  is  not  to  be  cavilled  at;  for 
when  this  Brahman  is  accepted  as  the  cause,  all  the  character¬ 
istics  of  a  cause,  namely  that  Brahman  is  omniscient,  omnipotent, 
and  a  great  conjurer,  fit  in  with  It  in  the  way  already  indicated. 


Section  II 


Topic  1:  Samkhya  View  Refuted  (Impossibility  of  Design) 

II  til 

T^rr-sr^rTrT:  Owing  to  the  inexplicability  of  design  ^  and 
(other  reasons)  the  inferred  one  *T  is  not. 

L  The  inferred  one  (Pradhana)  is  not  (the  cause)  owing  to 
the  impossibility  of  explaining  the  design ,  as  also  for  other 
reasons . 

Although  this  scripture  is  begun  with  the  purpose  of  establish¬ 
ing  the  fact  that  the  texts  of  the  Upani$ads  have  such  a  thing 
(viz  Brahman)  alone  in  view,  but  it  is  not  begun  for  proving 
or  disproving  any  conclusion  with  the  help  of  mere  reasoning, 
as  is  done  in  the  books  of  logic,  still  for  anyone  explaining  the 
texts  of  the  Upani$ads,  it  becomes  incumbent  to  repudiate  the 
philosophies  of  the  Samkhyas  and  others  which  run  counter  to 
the  right  knowledge.  This  is  why  the  succeeding  (i.e.  the 
present)  section  begins.  And  because  the  determination  of  the 
correct  meaning  of  the  Upani$ads  is  meant  for  right  knowledge, 
his  own  point  of  view  has  been  first  established  (by  Vyasa)  in 
the  course  of  determining  that  meaning;  for  that  is  preferable 
to  the  rejection  of  opposite  views. 

Opponent :  It  is  proper  to  establish  one’s  own  point  of 
view  for  the  sake  of  determining  what  the  right  knowledge  is, 
it  being  a  means  for  the  attainment  of  liberation  by  people 
aspiring  for  release;  what  need  is  there  of  demolishing  others’ 
points  of  view,  which  amounts  to  being  inimical  to  others? 

Vedantin :  Well,  it  is  just  as  you  say.  But  there  are  some 
people  of  dull  intellect  who  on  noticing  that  the  great  scriptures 
of  the  Samkhyas  and  others  are  accepted  by  the  honoured  ones 
and  that  they  proceed  under  the  plea  of  bestowing  the  right 
knowledge,  may  conclude  that  these  too  are  to  be  accepted  as 
a  means  to  right  knowledge.  Besides,  they  may  have  faith  in 


368  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  1 

these,  since  there  is  a  possibility  of  weight  of  reasoning  and 
since  they  are  spoken  by  omniscient  people.  Hence  this  effort 
is  being  made  to  expose  their  hollowness. 

Opponent :  Have  not  the  views  of  the  Samkhyas  and  others 
been  thrown  overboard  even  earlier  with  the  help  of  the 
aphorisms:  “Because  of  the  attribution  of  seeing,  the  one  not 
taught  in  the  Upani§ads  is  not  the  cause”  (I.  i.  5),  “There  can 
be  no  reliance  on  inference  owing  to  the  mention  of  desire” 
(I.  i.  18),  “Hereby  are  explained  all  other  theories”  (I.  iv. 
28)?  What  need  is  there  of  doing  it  all  over  again? 

That  is  being  answered  (by  the  Vedantin).  Even  the 
Samkhyas  and  others  cite  the  Upani$adic  texts  for  reinforcing 
their  own  points  of  view,  and  they  explain  these  in  conformity 
with  their  own  theories.  What  was  done  before  was  just  to 
prove  that  their  interpretations  are  mere  fallacies  and  not  the 
correct  explanations.  But  here  follows  a  refutation  of  their 
reasonings  independently  of  the  texts.  This  is  the  difference. 

With  regard  to  this  the  Samkhyas  argue  thus:  As  it  is  seen 
in  this  world  that  the  modifications  like  pots,  plates,  etc.  which 
remain  transfused  with  earth  as  their  common  substance,  origi¬ 
nate  from  the  material  cause  earth,  so  all  the  different  products, 
external  or  corporeal,  which  remain  transfused  with  happiness, 
misery,  and  delusion,  must  spring  from  a  material  cause  con¬ 
stituted  by  happiness,  misery,  and  delusion.  Now  the  material 
cause  constituted  by  happiness,  sorrow,  and  delusion  is  the  same 
as  Pradhana,  which  is  constituted  by  the  three  gnnas  (sattvay 
rajas,  and  tamas — intelligence,  activity,  and  inertia),  which  is 
insentient  like  earth,  and  which  engages  in  activity  by  under¬ 
going  diverse  transformation  under  a  natural  impulsion  for 
serving  a  sentient  soul  (by  providing  experience  or  liberation). 
So  also  they  arrive  at  that  very  Pradhana  on  such  grounds  of 
inference  as  limitation,  (origination  from  the  potency  of  the 
cause,  evolution  from  cause,  merger  into  cause,  unity  as  source 
of  diversity).1 

Vedantin  :  With  regard  to  this  we  say  that  if  this  has  to  be 


1The  inferences  take  such  forms:  “Diverse  things  like  earth  has  an 
unmanifested  cause,  they  being  limited  like  a  pot.”  “Mahat  and  others 


II.  ii.l] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


369 


decided  on  the  strength  of  analogy  alone,  then  it  is  not  seen  in 
this  world  that  any  independent  insentient  thing  that  is  not 
guided  by  some  sentient  being  can  produce  modifications  to 
serve  some  special  purpose  of  a  man;  for  what  is  noticed  in  the 
world  is  that  houses,  palaces,  beds,  seats,  recreation  grounds,  etc., 
are  made  by  the  intelligent  engineers  and  others  at  the  proper 
time  and  in  a  way  suitable  for  ensuring  or  avoiding  comfort  or 
discomfort.  So  how  can  the  insentient  Pradhana  create  this 
universe,  which  cannot  even  be  mentally  conceived  of  by  the 
intelligent  (i.e.  skilful)  and  most  far-famed  architects,  which 
is  seen  in  the  external  context  to  consist  of  the  earth  etc.  that 
are  fit  places  for  experiencing  the  results  of  various  works,  and 
in  the  context  of  the  individual  person,  of  the  body  and  other 
things  having  different  castes  etc.,  in  which  the  limbs  are 
arranged  according  to  a  regular  design,  and  which  are  seen  as 
the  seats  for  experiencing  various  fruits  of  actions?  For  this  is 
not  noticed  in  the  case  of  a  lump  of  earth  or  stone.  Even  in  the 
cases  of  earth  etc.  it  is  noticed  that  special  creations  take  place 
under  the  control  of  potters  and  others.  On  that  analogy,  the 
possibility  arises  of  Pradhana  also  being  under  the  control  of 
some  conscious  entity.  There  can  be  no  hard  and  fast  rule  that 
the  primal  cause  is  to  be  traced  through  the  attribute  (of 
insentiency)  that  inheres  in  the  very  nature  of  the  material 
causes  like  earth,  but  that  it  is  not  to  be  traced  through  the 
qualities  inherent  in  the  external  factors  like  the  potter.  And 
from  this  latter  point  of  view  nothing  is  contradicted,  rather 
the  Vedas  stand  vindicated,  since  the  Vedas  present  a  conscious 
entity  as  the  cause.  Accordingly,  by  reason  of  the  impossibility 
of  design  as  well,  the  insentient  Pradhana  should  not  be  inferred 
to  be  the  cause  of  the  universe.  By  the  word  “and”  (in  the 
aphorism)  is  adduced  the  additional  argument  that  the  ground 
of  inference  (i.e.  the  middle  term)  is  absent  from  the  major 


must  have  emerged  from  the  potency  in  their  cause  like  pot  etc.,  from 
the  potency  of  their  material.”  “The  effect  is  seen  to  evolve  from  a 
cause ,  as  a  pot  from  clay.”  “All  things  merge  successively  into  finer  and 
finer  material  sources.”  “All  variety  must  have  some  unity  as  its  source 
on  account  of  causal  relation  and  the  principle  of  merger  of  the  effect 
into  the  material  cause.” 

24 


370 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 


[II.  ii.  1 


term  (universe)  on  account  of  the  hollowness  of  the  argument 
about  the  inherence  of  the  qualities  of  happiness  etc.  in  the 
universe  (that  was  advanced  by  the  Samkhyas).  For  the  external 
and  corporeal  modifications  cannot  logically  remain  transfused 
with  happiness,  misery,  and  delusion  as  their  very  substance, 
for  happiness  etc.  are  perceived  to  be  internal  (i.e.  mental), 
whereas  sound  etc.  are  not  perceived  to  be  of  that  kind  (they 
being  external),  and  the  latter  are  perceived  as  the  cause  of  the 
former.  Moreover,  even  when  the  sound  etc.  continue  to  be  the 
same,  happiness  etc.  (connected  with  them)  are  felt  to  be 
different  in  accordance  with  the  mental  attitudes  towards  them. 
Similarly  if  somebody  infers  that  “since  limited  products  like 
roots,  sprouts,  etc.  are  born  out  of  a  combination  of  many 
materials,  therefore  all  external  and  corporeal  modifications  too 
must  have  been  similarly  formed  out  of  the  combination  of 
many  materials;  for  they  too  are  limited”,  then  one  will  be 
faced  with  the  predicament  of  sattva,  rajas ,  and  tamos  also 
springing  out  of  a  combination  of  many  materials,  they  too 
being  equally  limited.  On  the  contrary,  as  a  causal  relation  is 
in  evidence  even  in  the  case  of  beds,  seats,  etc.,  that  are  (seen 
to  be)  manufactured  (by  sentient  beings)  after  deliberation, 
therefore  after  noticing  a  causal  relationship  in  the  cases  of 
external  things  and  personal  modifications  one  cannot  jump  to 
the  conclusion  that  these  must  also  have  been  created  by  some 
insentient  entity.2 


IRII 


^  And  STfrf:  owing  to  (the  impossibility)  of  the  tendency 
to  act. 

2.  And  the  inferred  (Pradhdna)  cannot  be  the  cause ,  since  the 
tendency  to  create  ( cannot  logically  arise  in  ' it). 

Leave  alone  this  design.  It  is  not  possible  for  the  insentient 

aThe  Samkhya’s  argument  was  that  Pradhana  is  that  principle  where 
the  series  of  division  between  the  cause  and  effect  terminates.  But  the 
Vedantin  holds  that  the  series  can  as  well  end  in  either  Brahman  or 
Maya.  The  series  does  not  end  in  an  insentient  principle  that  has  no 


II.  ii.  21  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  371 

Pradhana  in  its  isolation,  even  to  have  the  tendency — the  depar¬ 
ture  from  the  state  of  balance,  consisting  in  attainment  of  a 
condition  of  relative  superiority  and  inferiority  by  sattva ,  rajas , 
and  tarnas ,  the  state  of  imminence  for  the  creation  of  some 
distinct  product — (that  is  necessary  for  that  design);  for  such 
(independent  action)  is  not  seen  in  the  case  of  earth  etc.  or 
chariot  etc.  For  neither  earth  etc.  nor  chariot  etc.,  which  are 
themselves  insentient,  are  seen  to  have  any  tendency  to  behave 
in  a  particular  way  unless  they  are  under  the  guidance  of 
potters  and  others  or  horses  and  the  like.  The  unseen  has  to  be 
inferred  from  the  seen.  So  on  account  of  the  absence  of  any 
logical  ground  for  acquiring  the  tendency  to  act,  the  insentient 
(Pradhana)  is  not  to  be  inferred  to  be  the  cause  of  the  universe. 

Sarhkhya :  Well,  even  in  the  case  of  a  mere  sentient  entity 
(in  its  isolation),  no  such  tendency  to  act  is  in  evidence. 

Veddntin :  This  is  true.  Still  insentient  things  like  chariot  etc. 
are  seen  to  have  a  tendency  to  act  only  when  in  association  with 
a  sentient  being. 

Sfrhkhya :  But  a  sentient  being  is  not  seen  to  develop  a  tend¬ 
ency  to  act  even  when  in  contact  with  insentient  tilings.8 

A  third  party  :  So  what  should  be  the  reasonable  position 
here?  Should  the  tendency  belong  to  that  (insentient  thing)  in 
which  it  is  noticed  or  to  him  in  association  with  whom  it  is 
seen  to  develop? 

Sarhkhya :  Well,  the  reasonable  position  is  that  it  should 
belong  to  that  in  which  it  is  actually  noticed,  for  here  both  (the 
tendency  to  act  and  the  bases  on  which  it  rests)  are  perceived 
together  as  such,  whereas  a  sentient  being  by  itself  is  not  per¬ 
ceived  like  the  chariot  etc.  to  be  the  seat  of  the  tendency  to 
act.  It  is  only  by  noticing  the  difference  of  a  living  body  from 
a  mere  insentient  chariot  etc.  that  a  sentient  being  can  be 
inferred  to  exist  in  association  with  the  body  etc.,  which  serve 
as  the  seat  of  the  tendency  to  act.  And  it  is  from  this  very  fact 


intelligence  to  guide  it,  for  what  is  noticeable  is  that  all  articles  are 
produced  by  intelligence. 

3  For  instance,  a  sleeping  man  does  not  look  up  and  begin  to  run  just 
because  a  piece  of  cloth  is  thrown  on  his  body.  So  all  tendency  to  act  is 
based  on  the  insentient. 


372 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  ii.  2 


of  sentience  and  activity  being  perceptible  when  a  body  exists 
but  being  imperceptible  when  the  body  does  not  exist,  that 
the  materialists  infer  that  even  sentience  belongs  to  the  body 
itself.  Therefore  the  tendency  to  act  belongs  to  the  insentient 
alone. 

Vedantin :  That  is  being  answered:  We  do  not  say  that  the 
tendency  does  not  belong  to  the  insentient  entity  in  which  it  is 
noticed.  Well  may  it  belong  to  it.  But  we  say  that  this  tendency 
is  derived  from  the  sentient,  since  it  exists  or  does  not  exist  in 
accordance  as  the  sentient  entity  exists  or  does  not  exist.  For 
instance,  even  though  such  transformations  as  burning  and 
emitting  light  subsist  in  fuel  etc.  and  though  they  are  not  in 
evidence  in  fire  in  its  isolation  (from  fuel),  still  they  originate 
from  fire  itself,  for  they  occur  as  a  result  of  contact  (of  fuel) 
with  fire  and  do  not  occur  when  that  contact  is  absent.  The 
case  is  the  same  here.  Even  according  to  the  materialists  a 
sentient  body  is  seen  to  be  the  impeller  of  the  insentient  char¬ 
iots,  etc.,  and  hence  the  view  that  the  sentient  is  the  impeller  of 
action  stands  undisputed. 

Opponent :  But  from  your  point  of  view,  the  Self,  even  when 
in  association  with  the  body  etc.,  cannot  reasonably  have  any 
tendency  to  act  over  and  above  having  Its  intrinsic  nature  of 
pure  consciousness,  and  hence  it  cannot  be  upheld  that  it  can 
impart  any  tendency  (to  others). 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  on  the  analogy  of  the  magnet  and  colour 
etc.  something  bereft  of  any  tendency  to  act  can  still  impart 
this  to  others.  For  instance,  a  magnet,  though  possessing  no 
tendency  to  act  by  itself,  still  induces  that  tendency  in  iron;  or 
objects  of  perception  like  colour  etc.,  which  by  themselves  have 
no  tendency  to  act,  still  impart  this  to  the  eye  etc.  Similarly  it 
is  but  logical  that  God  who  is  all-pervasive,  the  Self  of  all, 
omniscient,  and  omnipotent,  should  be  the  impeller  of  all  even 
though  He  is  Himself  free  from  any  tendency  to  act. 

Objection  :  Since  God  is  one  (without  a  second),  and  there 
is  nothing  else  to  be  impelled,  the  impellership  itself  is  a  fiction. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  it  has  been  said  again  and  again  that  God 
can  be  the  impeller  because  of  an  illusory  association  with  name 
and  form  conjured  up  by  ignorance.  Hence  the  existence  of 


II. ii.3]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  373 

such  tendency  becomes  a  possibility  only  if  omniscient  God  be 
accepted  as  the  cause  (of  creation),  but  not  so  on  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  something  insentient  as  the  cause. 

qjftsFfrf  3  \\\\\ 

<PT:-3PR[-5R[  Like  milk  and  water  if  this  be  the  claim,  then 
affa  even  there. 

3.  If  it  be  claimed  (that  Pradhana  acts  spontaneously)  like 
milk  and  water ,  then  even  there  (intelligence  is  the  guide). 

Opponent :  It  may  be  like  this.  As  insentient  milk  has  a  natural 
tendency  to  act  for  the  nourishment  of  calves,  or  as  insentient 
water  flows  spontaneously  for  the  good  of  people,  similarly 
insentient  Pradhana  will  also  naturally  act  for  fulfilling  human 
needs. 

Vedantin :  This  is  not  a  correct  statement,  since  we  infer  that 
even  in  those  cases,  the  milk  and  water  develop  a  tendency  to 
act  when  they  are  under  the  guidance  of  some  sentient  beings; 
for  the  chariot  etc.  which  are  admitted  by  both  of  us  to  be 
insentient,  are  not  seen  to  have  any  action  by  themselves.  The 
scripture  also  shows  that  all  motion  in  this  world  has  God  as 
its  source  as  in,  “He  who  inhabits  water  but  is  within  it  (whom 
water  does  not  know), . . .  and  who  controls  water  from  within 
(is  the  Internal  Ruler)”  (Bf.  III.  vii.  4),  “Under  the  mighty  rule 
of  this  Immutable,  O  GargI,  some  rivers  flow  eastward”  (Bf. 

III.  viii.  9),  and  such  other  texts.  Accordingly,  the  illustrations 
of  milk  and  water  should  not  be  cited  in  opposition,  since  they 
too  are  very  much  of  a  piece  with  your  point  of  view  that  is 
being  disputed  (viz  that  insentient  Pradhana  can  have  any 
independent  tendency).  Besides,  it  is  logical  to  hold  that  milk  is 
induced  to  flow  under  the  affectionate  desire  of  the  cow;  and 
it  is  drawn  out  by  the  sucking  of  the  calf.  Water  too  is  not 
quite  independent  since  its  flow  is  dependent  on  the  slope  of 
the  ground  etc.  And  it  was  shown  earlier  that  in  all  cases  there 
is  a  dependence  on  sentience.  But  under  the  aphorism,  “If  it 
be  said  that  Brahman  cannot  be  the  cause,  since  one  is  noticed 
to  collect  materials  for  the  performance  of  an  act,  then  we  say 


374  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  3 

no,  for  it  is  possible  on  the  analogy  of  milk”  (B.  S.  II.  i.  24), 
the  illustration  was  cited  from  the  common-sense  point  of  view 
to  show  that  action  can  take  place  in  a  thing  itself  without  the 
aid  of  any  external  means.  But  from  the  scriptural  point  of  view 
it  is  known  that  all  acts  take  place  under  God’s  bidding.  Hence 
this  does  not  contradict  the  earlier  one. 


And  :  owing  to  the  absence  of  anything 

extraneous  since  (Pradhana  can  have)  nothing  to 

rely  on. 

4.  And  (Pradhana  is  not  the  cause )  since  (nothing  extraneous 
to  it  exists ,  so  that )  it  has  nothing  to  rely  on  (for  impulsion  to 
or  stoppage  from  action). 

Pradhana  according  to  the  Sarhkhyas,  consists  of  the  three 
gimas  in  a  state  of  balance.  Apart  from  these,  nothing  else  exists 
externally  to  Pradhana,  on  which  it  can  depend  for  either  impel¬ 
ling  or  stopping  it.  As  for  the  (external)  soul  ( purusa ),  it  is  a 
passive  (witness),  neither  impelling  nor  stopping.  Hence 
Pradhana  is  without  any  other  help,  and  being  without  help,  it 
is  wrong  to  maintain  that  it  gets  sometimes  transformed  into 
mahat  etc.,  while  at  other  times  it  does  not.4  But  since  God 
has  omniscience,  omnipotence,  and  the  great  power  of  Maya, 
His  engagement  in  or  disengagement  from  activity  presents  no 
contradiction. 


3T-W4TFTN  ^  g’Jnfoq  IWI 

^  And  owing  to  non-occurrence  elsewhere 

it  cannot  be  like  grass  etc. 

5.  And  Pradhana  cannot  chcmge  ( automatically )  like  grass  etc . 
(into  milk  in  a  cow)  for  such  a  change  does  not  occur  else¬ 
where  (eg.  in  a  bull). 


4  For  there  is  no  adventitious  ground  for  these  changes  of  mood,  merit 
and  demerit  also  being  a  part  and  parcel  of  Pradhana,  and  not  an 
extraneous  compelling  force. 


II.  ii.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  375 

Opponent :  It  may  happen  thus:  As  grass,  leaves,  water,  etc. 
change  naturally  into  milk  without  the  help  of  any  other  factor, 
even  so  Pradhana  can  change  itself  into  mahat  and  the  rest. 

How  is  it  known  that  grass  etc.  are  not  helped  by  other 
factors? 

Because  no  other  factor  is  observed.  If  we  could  discover 
some  causes,  then  we  could  have  taken  up  grass  etc.  along  with 
those  causes  at  will  and  would  have  manufactured  milk;  but  we 
cannot  do  so.  Therefore  the  change  in  the  grass  etc.  is  spon¬ 
taneous.  So  also  it  can  be  the  case  with  Pradhana. 

Vedantin  :  With  regard  to  this  we  say:  Pradhana  can  change 
naturally  like  grass  etc.  if  the  change  in  the  grass  etc.  be 
accepted  as  automatic.  But  this  is  not  admitted,  since  other 
causes  are  perceived. 

How  is  it  known  that  there  are  other  causes? 

From  the  non-occurrence  (of  such  a  thing)  elsewhere.  For 
grass  etc.  eaten  by  a  cow  alone  changes  into  milk;  but  not  so 
when  rejected  or  eaten  by  a  bull  etc.  If  this  could  happen  with¬ 
out  any  cause,  then  grass  etc.  would  have  become  milk  even 
without  entering  into  a  cow’s  body.  A  thing  does  not  become 
causeless  just  because  men  cannot  manufacture  it  at  will.  For 
some  effects  can  be  produced  by  men,  while  others  happen 
under  divine  dispensation.  Besides,  men  also  can  produce  (more) 
milk  by  adopting  the  requisite  methods,  as  for  instance,  procur¬ 
ing  grass  etc.  For  people  wanting  plenty  of  milk  feed  the  cows 
with  plenty  of  grass,  and  thereby  they  procure  milk  abundantly. 
Hence  the  changes  in  Pradhana  cannot  occur  naturally  on  the 
analogy  of  grass  etc. 

ll^ll 

arfa1  Even  arwjTJpfr  when  admitted  OT  -3T*TRTt[  on  account 
of  the  absence  of  purpose. 

6 .  Even  if  (spontaneous  modification  of  Pradhana  be) 
accepted ,  still  (Pradhana  will  not  be  the  cause)  because  of  the 
absence  of  any  purpose. 

It  has  been  established  that  Pradhana  has  no  natural  tendency 


376 


BRAHMA  -  SCrTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.ii.6 


to  act.  If  now  as  a  concession  to  your  belief  we  admit  that 
Pradhana  has  a  spontaneous  impulsion  to  act,  still  defects  will 
persist. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  absence  of  any  purpose.  If  it  be  said  that 
Pradhana  has  a  spontaneous  tendency  to  act  and  that  there  is 
no  need  of  any  other  auxiliary  in  this  matter,  then  from  this  it 
will  follow  that  just  as  Pradhana  does  not  require  any  help  for 
its  activity,  so  also  it  will  not  stand  in  need  of  any  purpose  as 
well;  and  thereby  the  proposition  that  Pradhana  acts  for 
accomplishing  the  purposes  of  the  soul  will  be  set  at  naught. 
If,  however,  the  opponent  says  that  the  need  of  any  auxiliary 
alone  is  discarded,  but  not  so  any  purpose,  still  we  have  to 
search  for  the  purpose  leading  to  Pradhana’s  actions.  This 
purpose  may  be  experience  (of  joy  and  sorrow)  or  liberation, 
or  both.  If  experience  of  pleasure  and  pain  be  the  motive,  then 
what  kind  of  experience  can  be  provided  (by  Pradhana)  for  a 
soul  which  has  no  scope  for  its  own  perfection  or  imperfection 
(which  such  an  experience  can  bring  about)?  Besides,  liberation 
will  become  an  impossibility.5  If  liberation  be  the  purpose,  then 
liberation  being  an  accomplished  fact6  even  before  Pradhana  acts, 
its  engagement  in  activity  will  be  useless.  Moreover,  there  will 
be  the  contingency  of  an  absence  of  the  experience  of  sound 
etc.7  If  both  the  purposes  (experience  and  liberation)  be  admit¬ 
ted,  still  since  the  products  of  Pradhana,  which  are  to  be 
experienced,  are  infinite,  there  will  arise  the  predicament  of  non¬ 
release  (from  them,  since  the  experience  will  be  limitless).  And 
the  impulse  to  act  cannot  be  for  the  sake  of  satisfying  some  desire 
(or  curiosity),  since  neither  the  insentient  Pradhana  can  have 
any  curiosity,  nor  can  the  partless  and  pure  soul  have  it.  If  out  of 
a  fear  that  the  powers  of  knowing  and  creating  (that  are  present 
in  the  soul  and  Pradhana  respectively)  will  become  infructuous 
(in  the  absence  of  objects  and  creation),  Pradhana  be  supposed  to 
act,  then  just  as  the  soul’s  power  to  know  can  never  be  erad¬ 
icated,  so  also  Pradhana’s  power  to  create  will  continue  inter¬ 
ior  Pradhana  will  not  be  working  for  it. 

6  The  soul  being  naturally  free. 

7  For  Pradhana,  when  acting  for  liberation,  has  no  such  purpose  in  view. 


II.ii.7]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  377 

minably,  so  that  the  predicament  of  liberation  becoming  impos¬ 
sible  will  be  just  the  same.  Hence  it  is  wrong  to  say  that  Pra¬ 
dhana  acts  for  the  sake  of  the  soul. 

^PTTSfq  IIV9II 

On  the  analogy  of  a  man  and  a  loadstone  ^ 
if  such  be  the  contention  arfa  even  so. 

7.  If  it  be  argued  that  like  a  (lame)  man  (riding  on  a  blind 
man)  or  a  loadstone  (moving  iron),  (the  soitl  can  stimulate 
Pradhana),  even  then  (the  defect  'will  persist). 

Sa?hkhya  :  It  may  be  like  this:  As  a  man  having  the  power 
of  sight  but  not  that  of  movement,  he  being  lame,  acts  by 
riding  on  the  shoulders  of  somebody  else  who  has  the  power 
of  action  but  not  the  power  of  vision,  or  as  a  loadstone,  does 
not  move  by  itself  and  yet  makes  a  piece  of  iron  move,  similarly 
the  soul  can  impel  Pradhana. 

Opposition  thus  raises  its  head  by  relying  on  analogy. 

Veddntin :  To  this  we  reply  that  “even  so”,  there  is  no  escap¬ 
ing  the  defect.  For  instance,  the  defect  of  discarding  your 
proposition  crops  up  inasmuch  as  your  hypothesis  is  that  Pra¬ 
dhana  has  an  independent  tendency  to  act  and  the  soul  is  not 
an  impeller.  Moreover,  how  can  the  passive  soul  impel  Pradhana? 
Even  a  lame  man  guides  a  blind  man  by  his  speech,  but  the 
soul  has  no  such  causal  function  to  induce  action  in  Pradhana, 
since  it  is  actionless  and  attributeless.  And  it  cannot  stimulate 
movement  like  a  loadstone  by  mere  proximity,  for  proximity 
(between  soul  and  Pradhana)  being  eternal,  the  possibility  will 
arise  of  such  movement  also  becoming  endless.  In  the  case  of  a 
loadstone,  (the  proximity  being  inconstant),  there  can  be  such 
an  activity  as  the  attraction  (of  the  iron  to  itself),  for  the 
proximity  is  inconstant.  Besides,  the  loadstone  depends  on 
cleaning  etc.  for  its  action.  Hence  the  illustrations  of  the  man 
and  the  loadstone  are  inapt.  Again,  there  can  be  no  relation 
between  the  soul  and  Pradhana,  since  Pradhana  is  insentient,  the 
soul  is  indifferent,  and  there  is  no  third  factor  to  bring  them 
into  relation.  If,  however,  the  relation  follows  from  their 


378  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  7 

intrinsic  fitness  to  be  related  (with  each  other)8,  there  will 
arise  the  predicament  of  liberation  becoming  non-achievable, 
since  that  fitness  cannot  be  uprooted.  As  in  the  previous  aphorism, 
so  here  also  the  absence  of  purpose  has  to  be  taken  into  consid¬ 
eration  from  different  points  of  view.9  But  in  the  case  of  the 
supreme  Self  there  is  the  greater  advantage  that  It  has  inactivity 
from  Its  own  point  of  view,  but  a  driving  urge  (for  creation) 
from  the  standpoint  of  Maya. 


On  account  of  the  impossibility  of  the  relation 
of  the  Principal  (and  the  subordinate)  ^  as  well. 

8.  Besides ,  Pradhana  cannot  act  on  account  of  the  impossibility 
of  (the  existence  of)  any  relationship  of  the  principal  and  its 
subordinates  ( among  the  gunas  constituting  Pradhana). 

For  this  additional  reason  no  activity  for  Pradhana  is  possible. 
The  state  of  Pradhana  is  a  condition  of  balance  of  the  three 
constituents  (sattva,  rajas ,  and  tamas)  continuing  in  their  abso¬ 
lute  intrinsic  nature  after  giving  up  the  reciprocal  relation  of 
predominance  over  or  subordination  to  one  another.  There 
cannot  be  any  relation  of  predominance  or  subordination  among 
them  in  that  state  of  their  existence  in  their  pristine  nature 
which  is  independent  of  their  reciprocal  relation;  for  a  con¬ 
trary  supposition  will  lead  to  a  negation  of  their  individual 
nature.  And  since  there  is  no  external  factor  to  excite  them, 
there  can  be  no  origin  of  mahat  and  the  rest  that  results  from 
the  disturbance  of  the  balance  of  the  three  constituents. 

^  hs.ii 

And  even  if  the  inference  be  pursued  in 

another  way,  (still  the  defect  will  persist)  on 

account  of  the  absence  of  the  power  of  intelligence. 

8  The  soul  being  a  knower,  and  Pradhana  the  object  of  knowledge. 
The  one  presupposes  the  other. 

“Whether  the  purpose  be  experience,  or  liberation,  or  both? 


II.  ii.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  379 

9.  And  even  if  the  inference  be  pursued  otherwise  (still  the 
defect  will  persist)  owing  to  the  absence  of  the  power  of  intel¬ 
ligence  (in  Pradhana). 

Sdmkhya :  Even  then,  we  shall  draw  the  inference  in  a 
different  way,  so  that  this  last  defect  may  not  crop  up.  For  we 
do  not  admit  that  the  gunas  are  by  nature  mutually  independent 
or  that  they  are  changeless;  for  such  a  hypothesis  lacks  proof. 
But  their  nature  is  postulated  in  accordance  with  the  modifica¬ 
tions  springing  from  them.  Their  nature  must  be  postulated  to 
be  such  as  may  logically  lead  to  the  production  of  the  effects. 
And  the  accepted  view  is  that  the  gunas  are  naturally  unsteady. 
From  this  it  follows  that  even  during  equilibrium  the  gunas  exist 
in  a  state  of  potential  divergence. 

Veddntin  :  Even  so,  the  faults  like  the  impossibility  of  sustain¬ 
ing  design  etc.  rationally,  as  mentioned  earlier,  persist  just  as 
before,  since  Pradhana  is  bereft  of  the  power  of  intelligence. 
Should  the  opponent  infer  this  power  of  intelligence  as  well  (for 
Pradhana),  he  will  cease  to  be  an  opponent;  for  that  will  open 
the  door  to  the  belief  in  the  theory  of  Brahman,  that  a  single 
sentient  entity  is  the  material  cause  of  the  universe  of  varied 
appearances.  Again,  even  if  the  gunas  possess  a  potentiality  for 
imbalance,10  still  once  they  are  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  they 
cannot  undergo  loss  of  balance  in  the  absence  of  some  cause 
for  this;  or  should  they  become  disturbed  without  a  cause,  it 
will  lead  to  the  predicament  of  their  remaining  in  a  state  of 
disturbed  equilibrium  through  eternity,  for  the  absence  of  a 
cause  is  equal  in  either  state.  In  this  way  the  defect  (of  the 
non-emergence  of  the  derivatives  like  mahat)  stated  last,  will 
certainly  crop  up. 


^  And  owing  to  contradictions 

incoherent. 

10.  And  (the  Sdmkhya  doctrine  is)  mcoherewt  because  of  the 
contradictions  involved. 


10  Consisting  in  reciprocal  domination  and  subordination. 


380  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  ii.  10 

And  this  thesis  of  the  Samkhyas  is  self-contradictory.  For 
sometimes  they  enumerate  seven  organs  and  sometimes  eleven; 
similarly  sometimes  they  teach  about  the  origin  of  the  subtle 
elements  from  mahat ,  and  sometimes  from  the  ego;  so  also 
sometimes  they  mention  three  internal  organs,  and  sometimes 
one.  And  their  opposition  to  the  Upanisads,  speaking  of  God  as 
the  cause,  as  also  to  the  Smrtis  which  follow  the  Upanisads,  is  a 
patent  fact.  For  these  reasons  also  the  philosophy  of  the 
Samkhyas  is  incoherent. 

To  this  the  Savikhya  says:  Is  not  the  philosophy  of  the  fol¬ 
lowers  of  the  Upanisads  equally  incoherent,  since  in  this  it  is 
denied  that  the  tormented  (individual  being)  and  the  tormentor 
(world)  belong  to  distinct  categories?  For  when  they  postulate 
that  the  one  Brahman,  which  is  the  Self  of  all,  is  the  cause  of 
the  entire  world-appearance,  they  have  necessarily  to  admit  that 
the  afflicted  and  the  afflicter  are  but  two  aspects  of  one  and 
the  same  Self,  and  that  they  do  not  belong  to  different  cate¬ 
gories.  If  these  two,  the  tormentor  and  the  tormented,  be  but 
two  aspects  of  the  same  Self,  then  that  Self  will  never  get  freed 
from  those  two,  so  that  the  scripture  teaching  about  right 
knowledge  for  the  sake  of  getting  rid  of  affliction  will  become 
useless.  For  a  lamp  possessed  of  the  properties  of  heat  and  light 
cannot  reasonably  get  freed  from  heat  and  light  so  long  as  it 
continues  to  be  a  lamp.  As  for  the  illustration  of  water,  ripple, 
wave,  foam,  etc.,  even  there,  the  same  single  water  has  the 
appearances  of  ripple  etc.  which  merge  and  emerge  for  ever,  so 
that  in  the  case  of  the  water  as  well,  there  can  be  no  getting  rid 
of  these  ripple  etc.  Moreover  the  tormentor  and  the  tormented 
are  well  known  in  this  world  to  belong  to  distinct  categories. 
Thus  it  is  that  the  seeker  (who  is  afflicted  by  the  desire)  and 
the  thing  sought  (which  afflicts),  are  seen  to  be  entirely  differ¬ 
ent.  If  the  thing  sought  did  not  differ  in  substance  from  the 
seeker,  then  the  thing  sought  by  any  seeker  being  ever  an 
accomplished  fact  for  that  seeker,  he  should  have  no  desire  for 
that  thing,  just  as  a  lamp,  that  is  nothing  but  light,  has  got  its 
light  ever  present  in  itself  so  that  it  has  no  desire  (i.e.  need)  for 
it;  for  a  seeker  desires  something  that  is  still  unattained.  And  so 
also  an  object  (of  desire)  will  cease  to  be  an  object  (unless  there 


II.  ii.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  381 

be  a  difference  between  the  man  and  his  object).  And  should  it 
be  ever  coveted,  the  desire  will  be  only  about  itself.  But  this 
does  not  accord  with  facts;  for  the  terms  seeker  and  the  sought 
are  relative  expressions,  they  being  mutually  determined.  A 
relation  can  subsist  between  two  (mutually)  related  things,  but 
not  in  a  thing  standing  singly.  Hence  these  seeker  and  the  thing 
sought  must  be  different  and  so  also  must  be  the  detester  and 
the  thing  detested.  That  which  is  favourable  to  the  seeker  is  the 
desirable  thing  and  that  which  is  unfavourable  is  the  undesirable 
thing.  And  a  person  becomes  related  to  the  desirable  and  the 
undesirable  by  turns.  Since  the  desirable  things  are  few,  while 
the  undesirable  things  are  many,  both  the  desirable  and  the 
undesirable  are  in  effect  a  source  of  evil,  and  are  hence  called  a 
source  of  torment.  The  tormented  is  the  person  who,  though  one, 
gets  connected  with  each  of  these  tw  o  by  turns.  If  these  afflicter 
and  afflicted  be  identical,  no  liberation  will  be  possible.  But  if 
they  belong  to  different  categories,  then  liberation  may  per¬ 
chance  be  possible  at  times  as  a  result  of  the  removal  of  the 
cause11  of  their  coming  into  contact. 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this  the  answer  is:  There  is  no 
defect,  since  the  relation  of  the  tormentor  and  tormented  cannot 
exist  in  the  face  of  this  very  fact  of  unity  (of  the  Self).  This 
defect  would  have  existed  if  even  within  the  unity  of  the  Self, 
the  tormentor  and  the  tormented  could  be  related  by  way  of 
being  the  subject  and  the  object  of  each  other.  But  this  cannot 
be  so  precisely  because  of  this  unity.  For  fire  does  not  either 
burn  or  illuminate  itself  precisely  because  it  is  one  even  though 
possessed  of  the  different  attributes  of  heat  and  light  and  subject 
to  transformation.  Need  it  be  said  that  the  relation  of  the 
tormentor  and  the  tormented  cannot  be  possible  in  the  change¬ 
less  Brahman  which  is  one? 

Where  will  then  this  relation  of  the  tormentor  and  the  tor¬ 
mented  exist? 

11  Non-discrimination  between  the  soul  and  the  intellect.  Bondage  arises 
from  this  error  of  identity,  and  liberation  from  a  knowledge  of  their 
difference.  Bondage  and  liberation  really  belong  to  the  intellect;  but  just 
like  the  figurative  ascription  of  victory  and  defeat  of  the  army  to  the 
king,  bondage  and  liberation  are  asserted  about  the  soul. 


382  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  ii.  10 

The  answer  is:  Do  you  not  see  that  the  living  body  which 
stands  as  the  object  (of  the  act  of  scorching)  is, the  tormented 
and  the  sun  is  the  tormentor? 

Opponent :  Torment  means  pain  and  that  can  affect  a  sentient 
being,  but  not  the  insentient  body.  Should  affliction  belong  to 
the  body,  it  will  cease  with  the  death  of  the  body,  so  that  no 
spiritual  practice  need  be  found  out  for  the  removal  of  that 
affliction. 

Vedantin  :  The  answer  is:  A  sentient  being,  when  unassociated 
with  a  body,  is  not  seen  to  suffer.  Even  you  do  not  uphold  the 
view  that  a  change,  called  affliction,  comes  over  the  sentient 
being  in  its  isolation;  and  the  body  and  the  sentient  (soul) 
cannot  get  mixed  up,  since  that  would  give  rise  to  impurity 
etc.  (in  the  soul).  Nor  do  you  admit  that  torment  cap  torment 
itself.  So  even  from  your  point  of  view  how  can  there  be  a 
state  where  one  becomes  the  tormentor  and  the  other  the 
tormented? 

Opponent :  The  attribute  sattva  is  the  tormented  and  the 
attribute  rajas  is  the  tormentor. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  the  sentient  (soul)  cannot  enter  into  any 
combination  with  these  two.12 

Opponent :  Since  sentience  conforms  to  (i.e.  becomes  reflected 
on)  sattva ,  it  seems  to  be  afflicted. 

Vedantin  :  Then  it  comes  to  this  that  in  reality  it  (i.e.  the 
soul)  is  not  afflicted  at  all,  for  you  use  the  word  “seems”.  And  if 
it  is  not  afflicted,  then  the  word  “seems”  is  not  misplaced.  For 
if  somebody  says,  “A  (non-poisonous)  dundubha  (snake)  is  like 
a  (poisonous)  snake”,  the  dundubha  does  not  thereby  become 
poisonous;  or  if  one  says  “A  snake  is  like  a  dundubha”  the  snake 
does  not  thereby  become  non-poisonous.  So  it  has  to  be  under¬ 
stood  that  this  state  of  one  being  the  afflicted  and  the  other  the 
afflicter  is  a  creation  of  ignorance;  it  does  not  exist  in  the  truest 
sense.  If  such  be  your  position,  I  too  lose  nothing.  On  the 
contrary  if  you  understand  that  the  sentient  soul  is  afflicted  in 

12  If  sattva  and  rajas  be  the  afflicted  and  the  afflicter,  the  soul  need  not 
strive  for  liberation.  And  this  affliction  cannot  pass  on  to  the  soul  by 
reason  of  its  non-discrimination  from  the  afflicted  sattva ,  for  the  soul 
being  unattached,  cannot  get  attached  to  sattva  etc.  at  all. 


II.  ii.  11]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  383 

a  real  sense,  then  since  you  uphold  that  the  tormentor  (rajas)  is 
eternal,  there  will  be  all  the  less  possibility  of  liberation  from 
your  side. 

Opponent :  Although  the  power  to  afflict  and  the  capacity  of 
being  afflicted  be  everlasting,  still  affliction  being  dependent  on 
the  contact  coexisting  with  the  cause,13  an  absolute  cessation  of 
contact  follows  from  the  cessation  of  non-perception  (tamas) 
which  is  the  cause  of  the  contact.  Absolute  liberation  becomes 
a  logical  outcome  of  this. 

Vedantin  :  It  cannot  be  so,  since  you  hold  that  tamas ,  which 
is  of  the  nature  of  non-perception,  is  eternal.  And  since  there 
is  no  fixed  rule  about  the  appearance  or  disappearance  of  the 
gupas,  the  cessation  of  the  cause  (i.e.  non-perception)  of  the 
contact  (between  Nature  and  soul)  is  not  subject  to  any  fixed 
law.  Thus  the  separation  between  the  two  (soul  and  Nature; 
being  also  unpredictable  the  absence  of  liberation  follows  as  an 
inevitable  result  of  the  Samkhya  view  itself.  But  from  the  Upa- 
ni$adic  point  of  view,  one  cannot  doubt  even  in  dream  of  there 
being  no  liberation,  because  here  it  is  admitted  that  the  Self  is 
one,  that  the  one  cannot  be  both  the  subject  and  object,  and  that 
all  the  different  modifications  are  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad  to 
be  based  on  mere  speech.  Yet  within  the  range  of  empirical 
experiences,  the  state  of  one  being  the  tormentor  and  another 
the  tormented  is  to  be  accepted  for  the  time  being  just  for  what 
it  is  worth.  And  (since  its  eradication  follows  as  a  matter  of 
course  from  right  knowledge)  it  is  not  either  an  object  to  be 
questioned  about  or  avoided  (in  the  state  of  knowledge). 

Topic  2:  Vaisesika  Objection  Refuted 

The  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause  of  the  universe  has  been 
demolished.  Now  it  is  the  turn  of  the  theory  that  the  atoms  are 
the  cause.  While  on  this  task,  we  first  meet  the  objection  that 
can  be  fancied  against  the  believers  in  Brahman  by  the  believers 

“The  “cause”  is  ignorance  consisting  in  the  non-perception  of  the 
distinction  between  Nature  and  soul;  it  is  tamas.  The  “contact” — i.e.  the 
union  between  Nature  and  soul,  which  means  “the  idea  that  the  soul 
has  the  attributes  of  sattya ,  rajas ,  tamas ” — coexists  with  that  “non-percep¬ 
tion”  or  tamas . 


384  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  11 

in  the  atoms  as  the  cause.  In  this  matter  the  postulate  of  the 
Vaisesika  (atomist)  is  that  the  qualities  inhering  in  the  causal 
substance  reproduce  in  the  substance,  constituting  the  product, 
(a  set  of)  new  qualities  of  the  same  class;  for  a  white  cloth  is 
seen  to  be  born  out  of  the  white  yarns,  but  the  contrary  is  not  in 
evidence.  Hence  if  intelligent  Brahman  be  posited  as  the 
(material)  cause  of  the  universe,  intelligence  will  inhere  in  it. 
But  since  this  is  not  noticeable,  intelligent  Brahman  cannot  be 
the  (material)  cause  of  the  universe.  By  following  this  line  of 
argument  of  the  atomists  themselves,  the  aphorist  shows  that 
such  a  postulate  is  not  invariably  true: 

qiftebreT  www 

3T  Rather  like  the  great  and  long  (arising) 

from  the  short  and  inextensive. 

11.  Rather  (the  universe  may  originate  from  Brahman)  even 
as  the  great  and  long  (triads  etc.)  originate  from  the  short 
(dyad)  or  the  inextensive  (atom). 

This  is  their  (i.e.  Vaise$ikas*)  process  of  creation.  (During 
dissolution)  the  (ultimate)  atoms  continue  for  some  time  in  their 
rudimentary  state  without  producing  any  effect,  but  suitably 
possessed  of  the  respective  qualities  of  colour  etc.  Then  under 
the  influence  of  the  merits  and  demerits  (adrtfa — unseen  poten¬ 
tial  results  of  works)  etc.  of  creatures  aided  by  the  conjunction 
(with  one  another)  they  begin  creating  all  things  starting  from 
dyads;  and  the  qualities  of  the  causes  produce  new  qualities  in 
the  effect.  When  two  (ultimate)  atoms  create  a  dyad,  the 
colours,  viz  white  etc.,  inhering  in  the  atoms,  produce  a  new 
whiteness  etc.  in  the  dyad.  But  the  special  characteristic  of  the 
atoms,  viz  their  inextension  (i.e.  atomicity)  does  not  produce  a 
new  inextension;  for  it  is  postulated  that  a  dyad  comes  to  possess 
a  new  magnitude;  for  according  to  them  a  dyad  is  microscopic 
in  size  and  has  no  length.  When  again  two  dyads  produce  a 
tetrad  (combination  of  four  atoms)  the  whiteness  etc.,  inhering 
in  the  dyad,  produce  other  whiteness  etc.  in  a  similar  way.  But 
the  dyad-ness  (i.e.  microscopic  size)  and  the  lack  of  length, 


ILu.ll]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  385 

though  inhering  in  the  dyads,  do  not  produce  their  counter¬ 
parts;  for  their  tenet  is  that  a  tetrad  has  an  accretion  of  magni¬ 
tude  (or  greatness)  and  length.  The  same  line  of  argument  is 
to  be  followed  feven  if  many  atoms,  or  many  dyads,  or  the  atoms 
in  combination  with  the  dyads,  produce  an  effect.  Thus  even 
as  from  the  (ultimate)  atoms,  which  are  inextensive,  arise  dyads 
which  are  microscopic  in  size  but  have  no  length,  and  the  triads 
which  have  both  magnitude  and  length,  or  as  from  the  micro¬ 
scopic  and  non-linear  dyads  are  formed  the  triads  having  volume 
and  length,  but  neither  atomicity  nor  absence  of  length  is 
reproduced,  so  also  if  the  insentient  universe  emerges  out  of 
intelligent  Brahman,  what  do  you  lose? 

You  (the  atomist)  may,  however,  think  thus:  The  resulting 
substance,  a  dyad  for  instance,  is  beset  by  an  opposing  magnitude; 
hence  we  do  not  admit  that  the  atomicity  etc.  inherent  in  the 
cause  (atom)  produce  any  effect  (in  the  dyad).  But  the  universe 
is  not  beset  by  any  other  attribute,  called  insentience  opposed  to 
consciousness,  owing  to  which  the  consciousness  present  in  the 
cause  (Brahman)  could  not  produce  another  consciousness  in 
the  effect  (universe).  For  there  is  no  such  (positive)  attribute 
called  unconsciousness  (residing  in  the  world)  which  is  opposed 
ro  consciousness,  unconsciousness  being  only  a  negation  of 
consciousness.  Hence  consciousness  being  dissimilar  to  atomicity 
etc.,  it  (consciousness)  should  perforce  reproduce  another 
consciousness  (in  the  universe). 

Vedantin :  You  should  not  think  like  that;  for  even  as  the 
atomicity  etc.,  though  present  in  the  cause  (atom),  do  not 
become  the  producers  of  atomicity  etc.,  so  also  it  can  be  in  the 
case  of  consciousness.  To  this  extent,  both  are  on  the  same 
footing  here. 

And  it  cannot  be  the  case  that  atomicity  etc.  do  not  reproduce 
themselves  because  they  are  opposed  by  adverse  magnitude;  for 
the  atomicity  etc.  can  very  well  reproduce  themselves  before 
being  opposed  by  any  adverse  magnitude  (which  has  still  to 
emerge),  your  view  being  that  even  when  a  thing  is  being  pro¬ 
duced  it  remains  momentarily  without  any  quantity,  before  the 
qualities  actually  come  into  being.  It  cannot  be  said  that  atom¬ 
icity  etc.  become  so  very  preoccupied  with  the  production  of 


25 


386  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [ILii.ll 

other  dimensions,  that  they  do  not  reproduce  the  dimensions  of 
their  own  class,  it  being  understood  by  you  that  some  things 
(e.g.  duality)  which  are  entirely  different  from  these  (atomicity 
etc.)  produce  the  other  dimensions.  For  the  aphorisms  of  the 
Vai£e§ikas  run  as  follows:  “Magnitude  is  produced  from  the 
multiplicity  of  the  causes,  the  magnitude  of  the  cause,  and  the 
abundance  (i.e.  a  particular  combination)  of  the  cause”14  (Vai. 
Su.  VII.  i.  9);  “But  the  atom  is  opposed  to  this”15  (Vai.  Su 
VII.  i.  10);  “Hereby  are  explained  length  and  shortness”  (Vai. 
Su.  VII.  i.  17).  It  cannot  be  argued  that  owing  to  some  peculiar 
disposition,  multiplicity  etc.  alone  of  the  causes  are  reproduced, 
but  not  so  its  atomicity  etc.,  for  when  some  other  thing  or 
quality  is  being  produced,  all  the  qualities  of  the  cause  are 
equally  present  (in  the  cause)  through  inherence.  So  it  comes 
to  this  that  just  as  atomicity  does  not  reproduce  itself  in  the 
effect,  owing  to  its  peculiar  nature,  so  also  can  be  the  case  with 
consciousness  as  well.  This  is  how  it  is  to  be  understood.  And 
since  it  is  noticed  that  entirely  dissimilar  things  (and  attributes) 
are  produced  from  the  combination  of  different  things  etc., 
there  is  no  invariable  rule  that  things  (and  attributes)  of  the  same 
class  alone  are  produced. 

Vaisesika :  When  a  substance  is  under  discussion,  it  is  im¬ 
proper  to  cite  the  illustration  of  a  quality. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  because  the  point  sought  to  be  emphasized 
by  the  illustration  is  merely  the  production  of  dissimilars.  And 
there  is  no  reason  behind  a  rule  that  a  substance  must  be  illus¬ 
trated  by  a  substance  alone  or  a  quality  by  a  quality.  For  even 
your  aphorist  cited  a  quality  for  illustrating  a  substance  in  the 
aphorism:  “Since  a  conjunction  between  the  perceptible  and 
the  imperceptible  is  imperceptible,  nothing  can  exist  that  is  a 

“The  magnitude  of  the  triad  follows  from  the  multiplicity  of  the  dyads; 
the  magnitude  of  the  pot  follows  from  the  magnitude  of  earth;  and  the 
volume  of  a  large  heap  of  cotton  follows  from  the  volume  in  the  smaller 
heaps  making  it  up. 

“The  imperceptible  atom  is  opposed  to  magnitude  which  is  perceptible; 
multiplicity  and  volume  are  also  absent  from  the  dyad.  The  idea  of 
duality,  present  in  God’s  mind  resulting  in  relational  judgment,  is  the 
cause  of  the  duality  in  the  dyad. 


II.  ii.  12] 


BRAHMA  -  SUTRA  -  BHASYA 


387 


combination  of  the  five  elements”  (Vai.  Su.  IV.  ii.  2).  What  is 
implied  by  the  aphorist  is  this:  Just  as  the  quality,  called  con¬ 
junction,  existing  through  the  relation  of  inherence  in  the 
perceptible  earth  and  the  imperceptible  space  (when  they 
combine),  is  not  perceptible,  similarly  if  the  body  inheres  in 
(i.e.  be  a  combination  of)  the  perceptible  and  imperceptible 
five  elements  (as  its  material  causes),  it  should  not  be  perceived. 
But  as  a  matter  of  fact  the  body  is  directly  perceived.  Hence 
it  is  not  formed  by  the  five  elements.  Here  (in  this  illustration) 
conjunction  is  a  quality  and  the  body  is  a  thing. 

Furthermore,  it  was  elaborated  under  the  aphorism,  “But  it  is 
seen”  (B.  S.  II.  i.  6)  that  the  effect  can  be  dissimilar  (to  the 
cause). 

Opponent :  If  that  be  so,  the  present  topic  was  anticipated 
there  itself. 

Vedantin  :  We  say  no,  for  that  was  an  argument  against  the 
Samkhyas,  whereas  this  is  against  the  Vaise§ikas. 

Opponent :  Was  not  an  extension  of  those  arguments  made 
to  other  systems  as  well  under  the  aphorism,  “Hereby  are 
explained  all  the  theories  that  are  not  accepted  by  the 
wise”  (II.  i.  12),  the  reasons  being  the  same  in  both  the  cases? 

Vedantin  :  That  is  true.  Still  at  the  commencement  of  the 
scrutiny  of  the  Vaise$ika  system,  those  very  reasons  are  elab¬ 
orated  here  with  the  help  of  illustrations  accepted  by  themselves. 

Topic  3:  Atoms  not  the  cause  of  universe 

3?misfq  *  TOfcNSKflff:  ll?^ll 

arfa  3WTI  Even  from  either  point  of  view  'T  *>4  no  action 
(is  possible)  3RT:  hence  tffi-3DTT^  (there  is)  absence  of  that. 

12.  (Whether  adrsta  leads  the  atoms  or  conjunction  helps 
them),  in  either  case  no  action  is  possible ,  and  hence  there  can 
be  no  creation  or  dissolution . 

Now  the  doctrine  that  the  ultimate  atoms  are  the  causes  of 
the  universe  is  being  demolished.  That  doctrine  originates  thus: 
In  common  experience  it  is  seen  that  such  things  as  cloth  etc., 


388  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  12 

which  are  possessed  of  parts,  are  produced  from  such  things  as 
yarns  etc.  in  which  they  inhere  and  which  are  helped  by  the 
quality  of  conjunction.  On  the  analogy  of  this,  it  is  known  that 
all  things  that  are  composed  of  parts  are  produced  from  those 
respective  things  in  which  they  inhere  and  which  are  helped  by 
the  quality  of  conjunction.  The  (ultimate)  atom  is  the  culmina¬ 
tion  of  minuteness  where  this  division  between  the  whole  and 
its  parts  ceases.  Again,  this  whole  universe  consisting  of  hills, 
seas,  etc.,  is  a  composite  thing,  and  being  composite,  it  has  a 
beginning  and  an  end.  An  effect  is  not  produced  without  a 
cause.  So  the  ultimate  atoms  are  the  cause  of  the  universe.  This 
is  what  Kaijada  (father  of  the  Vai£e§ika  theory)  implies.  Now 
from  noticing  these  four  elements — earth,  water,  fire,  and  air — 
to  have  parts,  the  ultimate  atoms  are  imagined  to  be  of  four 
kinds.  Since  the  ultimate  atoms  stand  at  the  furthest  limit  of 
minuteness,  so  that  there  can  be  no  division  beyond  them,  there¬ 
fore  earth  etc.  in  the  course  of  destruction  reach  the  ultimate 
atoms  as  the  culmination  of  their  disintegration.  That  is  the  time 
of  dissolution.  After  that  at  the  time  of  creation,  some  action 
starts  in  the  ultimate  atoms  of  air  under  the  influence  of  adfsta 
(unseen  potential  fruits  of  works  of  creatures).  That  action  unites 
the  atom,  on  which  it  occurs,  with  another  atom.  From  that  com¬ 
bination  originates  air  through  a  gradual  process  starting  with  (the 
production  of)  dyads.  Thus  also  originate  fire,  water,  and  earth, 
and  thus  the  body  together  with  the  sense-organs.  In  this  way, 
this  whole  universe  originates  from  the  atoms.  And  from  the 
(qualities  of)  colour  etc.  inherent  in  the  atoms,  the  colour  etc. 
of  the  dyads  etc.  are  produced  just  as  it  occurs  in  the  case  of 
the  yams  and  cloth.  This  is  how  the  Vaise$ikas  think. 

With  regard  to  this  we  say:  It  has  to  be  admitted  that  the 
combination  of  the  atoms,  existing  in  their  isolation  is  contin¬ 
gent  on  action,  since  the  yarns  are  seen  to  combine  when  they 
are  being  acted  upon  (by  others).  And  since  action  is  an  effect, 
some  cause  for  it  has  to  be  assumed.  If  such  a  cause  be  not 
admitted,  then  in  the  absence  of  any  cause,  no  initial  action  will 
be  possible  in  the  atoms.  And  even  if  a  cause  be  admitted,  it 
must  be  accepted  in  conformity  with  common  experience  to  be 
something  like  effort,  impact,  etc.  But  since  these  are  impossible 


II.  ii.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  389 

(during  the  state  of  dissolution),  no  initial  action  will  take  place 
in  the  atoms.  For  in  that  state,  no  effort,  which  (according  to 
the  atomist)  is  a  quality  of  the  soul,  can  be  possible  in  the 
absence  of  a  body;  for  effort  springs  up  as  a  quality  of  the  soul 
when  a  contact  between  the  mind  and  the  soul  takes  place  in 
the  mind  having  the  body  as  its  seat.  By  the  same  reason,  all 
ordinarily  cognized  causes  like  impact  etc.16  are  to  be  rejected; 
for  all  these  come  after  creation,  and  hence  cannot  be  the  causes 
of  the  initial  action  (in  atoms). 

Again,  if  it  be  maintained  that  adrtfa  is  the  cause  of  the  initial 
movement,  then  in  what  does  it  inhere — in  the  soul  or  the 
atoms?  In  either  case  the  first  movement  in  the  atom  cannot 
possibly  result  from  adrtfa,  since  adrtfa  is  insentient.  For  in  the 
course  of  examining  the  Samkhya  point  of  view  it  was  said  that 
an  insentient  thing  by  itself  neither  acts  nor  makes  anything  else 
act  unless  it  is  presided  over  by  some  sentient  being.  As  for  the 
soul,  its  (quality  of)  consciousness  does  not  emerge  in  that 
state  (according  to  the  Vai$e$ika),  so  that  it  is  insentient;  hence 
even  if  adftfa  be  admitted  to  inhere  in  the  soul,  it  cannot  be 
the  cause  of  action  in  the  atom,  for  adrtfa  has  no  connection 
with  the  atom. 

Opponent :  The  soul  possessing  the  adrsfa  is  in  conjunction 
with  the  atoms. 

Vedantin  :  Then  from  a  constancy  of  that  conjunction,  the 
predicament  will  arise  of  action  becoming  constant;  for  nothing 
else  exists  to  put  a  check.  Thus  from  the  absence  of  any  well- 
determined  cause  of  action,  the  initial  action  cannot  occur  in 
the  atoms.  And  because  of  the  absence  of  any  action,  any  con¬ 
junction  that  depends  on  such  an  action  will  be  impossible.  In 
the  absence  of  conjunction,  dyads  and  other  products  coming 
out  of  conjunction  will  have  no  existence. 

Again,  when  an  atom  comes  into  conjunction  with  another, 
does  it  do  so  wholly  or  in  some  part?  If  the  conjunction  occurs 
wholly,  then  there  will  be  no  increase  in  magnitude,17  so  that 
the  result  will  be  a  mere  atom.  Besides,  this  leads  to  contradic- 

10  Impulsion,  weight,  acceleration,  elasticity,  etc. 

1TThe  incoming  atom  will  be  wholly  absorbed  in  the  one  in  situ ,  so 
that  no  additional  space  will  be  covered  by  the  two. 


390  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  12 

tion  of  common  experience,  for  a  thing  having  dimensions  is  seen 
to  combine  with  another  having  them.  Should  (on  the  other 
hand)  the  ultimate  atom  combine  through  some  art,  it  will 
result  in  making  the  atom  a  composite  thing  (thus  demolishing 
the  atomists’  theory). 

Opponent :  The  ultimate  atoms  may  have  imaginary  parts. 

Vedantin  :  Since  imaginary  things  are  unreal,  the  conjunction 
will  surely  be  unreal,  and  hence  it  will  not  become  the  non- 
inherent  ( asamavayin )  cause  of  the  thing  produced.  In  the 
absence  of  the  non-inherent  chuse  (viz  conjunction),  such 
products  as  the  dyads  etc.  will  not  come  into  being.  As  in  the 
first  creation  the  atoms  cannot  possess  any  action  for  producing 
conjunction;  there  being  no  cause  for  that  action,  similarly  on 
the  eve  of  the  cosmic  dissolution  the  atoms  will  have  no  action 
for  causing  their  separation;  for  even  then,  no  well-determined 
cause  can  be  noticed  to  make  them  act.  As  for  adr$ta ,  it  is  meant 
for  producing  experience  (of  happiness  and  sorrow)  and  not 
dissolution.  Hence  in  the  absence  of  any  cause,  the  atoms  can 
have  action  neither  for  bringing  about  their  conjunction  nor 
disjunction.  This  absence  of  conjunction  and  disjunction  will 
lead  to  an  absence  of  creation  and  dissolution.  Therefore  this 
theory  of  the  atoms  as  the  cause  stands  discredited. 

|(^|| 

And  on  account  of  assuming  inherence 

(creation  and  dissolution  become  impossible),  because 

of  infinite  regress  tfFRTRT  arising  from  a  parity  of  reasoning. 

13.  And  (there  can  be  no  creation  or  dissolution)  by  reason 
of  assuming  inherence ,  for  this  leads  to  an  infinite  regress  on  a 
parity  of  reasoning . 

The  portion  “And  by  reason  of  assuming  inherence”  is  to  be 
connected  with  “there  can  be  no  creation  or  dissolution”  (in  the 
previous  aphorism)  which  was  meant  for  refuting  the  theory  of 
the  atoms  as  the  cause  of  the  universe,  which  is  the  topic  under 
discussion.  Your  (Vaise$ika’s)  theory  is  that  the  dyad,  originat¬ 
ing  from  two  atoms,  becomes  entirely  dissimilar  to  these  two, 


II.  ii.  13]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A$YA  391 

and  it  inheres  in  both  of  them.  But  one  accepting  such  a  view 
cannot  substantiate  the  theory  of  the  atoms  as  the  cause. 

Why? 

Because  “this  leads  to  an  infinite  regress  on  a  parity  of  reason¬ 
ing”.  Just  as  the  dyad,  though  absolutely  dissimilar  to  the  two 
atoms,  becomes  connected  with  them  through  the  relationship 
of  inherence,  so  also  inherence  itself,  which  is  absolutely 
different  from  the  inhering  things,  should  be  connected  with 
the  inhering  things  through  a  separate  relationship  of  the  nature 
of  inherence,  since  the  fact  of  similarity  of  absolute  difference 
exists  here  as  well.  And  from  this  it  follows  that  for  those 
successive  relationships,  other  relationships  of  inherence  have  to 
be  imagined.  In  this  way  the  door  is  laid  open  for  an  infinite 
regress. 

Opponent :  Inherence  is  an  everlasting  relationship  that  is 
actually  grasped  through  the  idea  of  “here”  along  with  the 
things  inhering.  It  is  not  perceived  in  its  isolation  (apart  from 
the  related  objects)  or  through  some  other  relationship,  hence 
no  other  relation  need  be  sought  for  it;  so  there  can  be  no 
possibility  of  infinite  regress. 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is,  no;  for  in  that  case  conjunction 
also  can  be  an  everlasting  relationship  between  the  things  con¬ 
joined,  so  that  no  other  relationship  like  inherence  need  be 
sought  for  it.  If  now  it  be  said  that  conjunction  is  different 
(from  the  things  conjoined),  so  that  it  has  to  be  related  through 
another  relationship,  then  inherence  also  must  need  some  other 
relationship,  since  it  too  is  different  (from  the  things  inhering). 
And  it  is  not  reasonable  to  assert  that  conjunction  has  need  of 
some  other  relationship,  it  being  a  quality,  whereas  inherence 
has  no  such  need,  since  it  is  not  a  quality;  for  in  either  case  the 
need  determining  such  a  relationship  is  the  same.  The  technical 
terminology  (of  the  Vaisesikas)  dubbing  conjunction  as  a 
quality  (and  inherence  as  a  relationship)  has  no  bearing  in  the 
matter  of  determining  this  need.18  So  far  as  those  who  consider 
inherence  as  a  separate  category  are  concerned,  an  infinite 

18  Conjunction  is  as  much  dissimilar  to  the  things  conjoined  as  inherence 
is  to  the  things  inhering,  hence  both  must  be  classed  together. 

There  can  be  no  such  rule  that  whatever  subsists  on  a  substance 


392  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  13 

regress  is  inevitable.  And  when  this  infinite  regress  becomes  a 
possibility,  and  when  the  whole  series  of  successive  relationship 
of  inherence  fails  on  the  failure  of  any  one  relationship  in  that 
series  being  proved  to  be  ultimate,  a  dyad  cannot  arise  out  of 
two  atoms.  For  this  reason  also  the  theory  of  the  atoms  as  the 
cause  is  untenable. 

^  wm.  ii?*h 

^  Furthermore,  MiqltJ  owing  to  persistence  eter- 

nally. 

14.  (The  atomic  theory  is  inadmissible)  f or  the  further  reason 
of  (activity  etc.)  persisting  eternally. 

Again,  the  atoms  have  to  be  accepted  as  naturally  active, 
inactive,  both  active  and  inactive,  or  neither  active  nor  inactive; 
for  no  other  alternative  is  possible.  But  all  the  four  alternatives 
are  inadmissible.  If  the  atoms  be  naturally  active,  it  will  lead  to 
the  possibility  of  ruling  out  dissolution  altogether,  for  activity 
will  persist  eternally.  If  the  atoms  be  naturally  inactive,  it  will 
lead  to  the  possibility  of  ruling  out  creation  altogether,  for 
inactivity  will  persist  eternally.  And  they  cannot  naturally  have 
both  activity  and  inactivity,  for  that  is  irreconcilable  owing  to 
contradiction.  If  they  have  neither  activity  nor  inactivity,  by 
nature,  then  one  will  have  to  admit  that  these  two  originate 
from  some  cause;  but  then  if  such  causes  as  adfsfa  be  ever  at 
hand,  it  will  lead  to  constant  activity;  and  if  they  are  not  under 
the  guidance  of  adrtfa  etc.,  it  will  lead  to  constant  inactivity. 
For  this  reason  also  the  theory  that  the  atoms  are  the  cause  is 
unjustifiable. 


wifeiww  fawft  <RRI^  nun 

And  owing  to  possession  of  colour  etc. 

a  reversal  will  occur  53FTRJ  for  this  accords  with  ex¬ 
perience. 

must  be  a  quality  like  colour  etc.,  for  action  etc.  also  exist  on  substances. 
And  if,  owing  to  the  denial  of  inherence  in  the  case  of  conjunction, 
the  latter  ceases  to  be  a  quality,  the  Vedantin  loses  nothing  thereby. 


II.  ii.  15]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  393 

IS.  And  on  account  of  the  possession  of  colour  etc.  there 
i will  be  a  reversal  (of  the  nature  of  the  atoms),  for  this  accords 
with  experience. 

The  Vaise$ika  asserts  that  the  ultimate  atoms  stand  at  the  last 
limit  of  a  process  of  breaking  up  of  composite  things  till  there 
can  be  no  further  division,  that  these  atoms  are  of  four  kinds, 
possessed  of  colour  etc.,  that  they  are  the  constituents  of  the 
four  elements  and  the  modifications  of  the  elements  endowed 
with  the  qualities  of  colour  etc.,  and  that  they  are  eternal.  That 
tenet  of  theirs  is  baseless.  For  by  virtue  of  possessing  colour  etc. 
the  atomicity  and  everlastingness  of  the  atoms  stand  contra¬ 
dicted;  that  is  to  say,  the  atoms  become  grosser  and  less  eternal 
than  (what)  the  ultimate  cause  (should  be),  a  position  that  is 
the  opposite  of  what  the  atomists  intend. 

Why  so? 

For  thus  it  is  seen  in  the  world.  Anything  that  is  possessed 
of  colour  etc.  in  this  world  is  seen  to  be  grosser  and  less  perma¬ 
nent  than  its  cause;  for  instance  a  cloth  is  grosser  and  less  per¬ 
manent  than  its  yams;  and  the  yarns  are  grosser  and  less 
permanent  than  the  fibres.  Similarly,  as  these  ultimate  atoms  are 
admitted  by  them  to  have  colour  etc.,  they  too  have  some  cause 
in  comparison  with  which  they  will  be  grosser  and  less  perma¬ 
nent.  If  this  be  the  case,  the  grounds  of  eternality  shown  by 
them  in  (the  aphorism),  “Anything  that  has  existence  and  is 
unproduced  is  eternal”  (Vai.  Su.  IV.  i.  1)  would  not  apply  to 
the  ultimate  atoms,  for  on  account  of  the  reason  shown  above 
the  atoms  also  should  have  some  cause.  As  for  the  second  ground 
of  eternality  stated  by  them  in,  “And  (atoms  are  eternal,  for 
on  that  assumption  alone)  there  can  be  a  specific  denial  about 
an  effect  by  saying,  ‘It  is  impermanent’  ”10  (Vai.  Su.  IV.  i.  4), 
that  also  does  not  prove  the  permanence  of  the  atoms  as  a 
matter  of  necessity.  For  while  it  is  true  that  unless  there  is  some¬ 
thing  eternal,  the  negative  (na)  cannot  form  a  compound  term 

“The  denial  of  permanence  in  the  product  by  saying,  “This  product 
is  impermanent”,  would  not  be  possible  if  the  causes,  the  ultimate  atoms, 
were  also  impermanent;  for  existence  and  non-existence  are  correlative 
terms. 


394  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.ii.15 

with  eternality  (to  mean  non-eternality),  yet  on  such  a  ground 
it  cannot  be  asserted  that  the  compound  term  ( anitya — non¬ 
eternal)  has  to  depend  (for  its  meaning)  on  the  eternality  of 
the  ultimate  atoms  alone;  for  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  eternal 
Brahman  is  already  available  as  the  supreme  cause.  Moreover, 
it  is  not  a  fact  that  the  existence  of  anything  becomes  established 
merely  because  a  certain  word  signifying  a  certain  thing  is  in 
common  use.20  Rather  it  is  only  when  words  and  ideas  become 
established  to  be  true  with  the  help  of  other  valid  means  of 
proof  (viz  perception,  inference,  etc.)  that  they  find  vogue  in 
common  usage.  The  third  ground  of  eternality  is  stated  in,  “And 
want  of  knowledge”  (Vai.  Su.  IV.  i.  5).  Now  if  this  aphorism 
be  explained  to  mean,  “Eternality  is  also  deducible  from  ‘Want 
of  knowledge’  consisting  in  not  knowing  through  direct  percep¬ 
tion  any  cause  of  those  existing  causes  whose  effects  are  fully 
in  view”,  then  the  dyad  also  will  become  eternal.21 

Now  if  the  qualifying  term  “not  having  any  substance  as  the 
cause”  be  added  after  “cause”  (in  the  previous  explanation),22 
still  eternality  will  be  determined  by  the  absence  of  a  cause; 
but  then  that  was  stated  earlier  (Vai.  Su.  IV.  i.  1)  and  it  will 
involve  a  repetition  to  restate  it  in  the  aphorism,  “And  want  of 
knowledge”.  Again,  if  the  explanation  be  this,  “The  eternality  of 
the  cause  is  determined  by  the  ‘Want  of  knowledge’,  consisting 
in  the  impossibility  of  there  being  any  other  third  cause  of 
destruction,  apart  from  the  destruction  of  the  non-inherent 
cause  and  the  destruction  of  the  inherent  causes”,23  then  we 

20  For  otherwise  a  ghost  spoken  of  as  residing  in  a  tree  would  become 
true. 

21  For  the  causes  of  the  dyad,  viz  two  ultimate  atoms,  also  are  imper¬ 
ceptible;  and  imperceptibility  of  the  cause  is  adduced  by  you  as  a  ground 
for  the  eternality  of  the  effect. 

“The  explanation  now  will  be,  “Want  of  knowledge,  consisting  in  not 
knowing  any  substance  as  the  cause  of  those  causes  whose  effects”  etc. 
The  atoms  being  known  as  the  causes  of  the  dyads,  the  dyads  will  not 
become  eternal. 

23  A  cloth  is  destroyed  by  the  destruction  of  its  non-inherent  cause, 
viz  conjunction  among  yarns,  or  by  the  destruction  of  its  inherent  cause, 
viz  the  yarns.  Both  these  causes  are  impossible  for  an  ultimate  atom  which 
has  no  parts.  Hence  it  is  eternal. 


II.  ii.  16]  BRAHMA  -  SuTRA  -  BHA§YA  395 

say  that  there  is  no  such  rule  (as  propounded  by  you)  that  a 
thing  undergoing  destruction  must  be  destroyed  in  either  of 
the  two  ways  only.  This  could  be  so  only  on  the  supposition 
that  whenever  a  new  thing  is  produced,  it  is  produced  by  many 
things  helped  by  their  conjunction.  When,  however,  it  is  admit¬ 
ted  that  a  common  cause  (e.g.  earth,  gold,  etc.),  considered  in 
itself  as  devoid  of  the  peculiarities  (present  in  the  products), 
becomes  the  originator  of  something  else  by  getting  transformed 
into  another  distinct  state,  then  the  destruction  may  follow  from 
the  cessation  of  the  particular  state  as  in  the  case  of  the  melting 
away  of  the  solidified  clarified  butter.  Hence  on  account  of 
the  possession  of  colour  etc.  the  ultimate  atoms  will  stand 
opposed  to  what  they  are  postulated  to  be.  From  this  point  of 
view  also  the  atomic  theory  is  inadmissible. 

3wn  \\\\\\ 

^  And  on  account  of  defecf  from  either  point 

of  view. 

16 .  And  (the  atomic  theory  is  untenable)  because  it  is 
defective  from  either  point  of  view. 

Earth  is  gross  and  is  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  smell,  taste, 
colour,  and  touch;  water  is  fine  and  possessed  of  the  qualities 
of  colour,  taste,  and  touch;  fire  is  finer  and  is  possessed  of 
colour  and  touch;  and  the  finest  is  air  possessed  of  touch.  Thus 
it  is  seen  in  this  world  that  these  four  elements  have  (an  increas¬ 
ingly)  greater  or  lesser  number  of  the  qualities  and  are  com¬ 
paratively  gross,  fine,  finer,  and  finest.  Should  the  ultimate 
atoms  also  be  considered  likewise  to  be  possessed  of  qualities  in 
a  comparatively  greater  or  less  degree,  or  should  they  not?  In 
either  case  they  will  inevitably  be  open  to  defects.  For  instance, 
if  it  be  thought  that  they  have  an  abundance  or  paucity  of 
qualities,  those  atoms  that  have  an  abundance  will  have  an 
augmentation  of  grossness,  so  that  they  will  cease  to  be  the 
ultimate  atoms.  And  it  cannot  be  said  that  qualities  can  increase 
even  without  having  an  augmentation  of  grossness,  for  in  the 
gross  products  of  the  elements  it  is  seen  that  an  accretion  of 


396 


[II.il.  16 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 

attributes  is  followed  by  an  increase  in  grossness.  If,  however, 
no  comparative  abundance  or  paucity  of  qualities  be  thought 
of  and  for  establishing  a  parity  among  the  atoms  it  is  considered 
that  each  of  the  atoms  possesses  a  single  quality,  then  there  will 
be  no  perception  of  touch  in  fire,  no  colour  and  touch  in  water, 
and  no  taste,  colour,  and  touch  in  earth,  for  the  qualities  in 
the  products  orignate  from  the  qualities  of  the  causes.  Again, 
if  all  the  ultimate  atoms  be  assumed  to  be  possessed  of  four 
qualities,  then  smell  should  be  perceived  even  in  water,  smell 
and  taste  in  fire,  and  smell,  colour,  and  taste  in  air.  But  this  does 
not  conform  to  experience.  For  this  reason  also  the  atomic 
theory  is  illogical. 


On  account  of  non-acceptance  ^  as  well 
absolute  SFT^SfT  non-reliance. 

11.  This  (theory  of  atom  as  the  cause)  is  to  be  entirely 
ignored ,  since  it  is  not  accepted  (by  the  worthy ). 

The  theory  of  Pradhana  as  the  cause  is  partially  incorporated 
in  their  writings  even  by  some  Vedic  scholars  like  Manu  on 
the  ground  of  its  being  helpful  in  establishing  such  views  as  the 
pre-existence  of  the  effect  in  the  cause,  (the  non-attachment  of 
the  soul,  its  sentience),  etc.  But  this  atomic  theory  is  not  adopt¬ 
ed  even  in  the  least  by  any  worthy  person.  Hence  it  is  to  be 
wholly  discarded  by  the  followers  of  the  Vedas.  Moreover,  the 
Vaise$ikas  admit,  as  the  subject-matter  of  their  scriptures,  six 
categories,  viz  substance,  quality,  action,  class,  distinction,  and 
inherence  which  differ  entirely  from  one  another  and  which 
are  possessed  of  dissimilar  characteristics,  like  man,  horse,  and 
hare.  Having  defined  them  to  be  so,  they  admit  contrary  to 
their  own  theory,  that  the  other  categories  are  dependent  on 
substance.  But  that  is  untenable. 

How? 

Jiist  as  it  is  seen  in  the  world  that  among  a  hare,  Ku$a  grass, 
and  a  Palasa  tree,  which  live  by  maintaining  their  absolute  dis¬ 
tinctness,  there  can  be  no  subjection  of  the  rest  to  any  one  of 


II.  ii.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  397 

them,  similarly  qualities  and  the  rest,  should  not  be  dependent 
on  substance,  since  substance  and  the  rest  are  entirely  different. 
Again  if  quality  and  the  rest  be  dependent  on  substance,  then 
since  they  exist  when  a  substance  is  there,  and  cease  to  exist 
when  the  substance  is  not,  it  would  amount  to  this  that  the 
substance  alone  becomes  the  content  of  various  words  and  ideas 
in  accordance  with  differences  in  its  own  forms,  conditions,  etc., 
even  as  the  same  Devadatta  comes  to  be  known  through  many 
words  and  ideas  (like  father,  brother,  son,  kind,  learned,  etc.) 
owing  to  the  differences  in  his  states  and  circumstances.  But  in 
that  case  there  will  be  the  possibility  of  the  Samkhya  theory 
cropping  up  and  your  own  theory  being  stultified. 

Atomist :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  smoke,  though  different  from 
fire,  is  seen  to  depend  on  fire? 

Vedantin :  True,  it  is  seen.  But  precisely  because  a  difference 
between  them  is  perceived,  it  is  concluded  that  smoke  and  fire 
are  different.  But  in  the  case  under  discussion,  the  substance 
itself  being  known  as  possessed  of  the  respective  attributes  in 
such  perceptions  as,  “a  white  blanket”,  “a  red  cow”,  “a  blue 
lotus”,  and  so  on,  there  can  be  no  such  perception  of  difference 
between  a  substance  and  a  quality  as  between  fire  and  smoke. 
Hence  the  quality  is  one  with  the  substance.  Hereby  is  explained 
how  action,  class,  distinction,  and  inherence  are  also  one  with 
the  substance. 

If  it  be  argued  that  the  dependence  of  a  quality  on  its  sub¬ 
stance  follows  from  the  fact  of  their  inseparability,  then  does 
that  inseparableness  consist  in  not  having  different  loci,  or 
different  times,  or  incompatible  nature?  But  none  of  these 
alternatives  can  be  justified.  If  their  inseparableness  consists  in 
not  being  present  in  different  places,  then  your  own  position 
will  be  reversed. 

How? 

For  according  to  you,  a  piece  of  cloth  produced  from  yarns 
exists  in  the  yarns  and  not  in  a  distinct  place  of  its  own;  but 
the  quality  of  the  cloth,  viz  whiteness  etc.,  are  admitted  to  exist 
in  the  place  occupied  by  the  cloth  and  not  in  that  occupied  by 
the  yarns.  For  this  is  what  the  atomists  assert:  “Substances 
produce  other  substances,  and  qualities  other  qualities”  (Vai. 


398  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  [II.  ii.  17 

Su.  I.  i.  10).  The  yarns  which  are  the  material  substance,  give 
birth  to  the  cloth  as  their  product;  and  the  qualities  of  whiteness 
and  the  rest,  existing  in  the  yarns,  generate  similar  other  qualities 
— whiteness  and  the  rest  in  the  product,  the  cloth.  This  is  what 
they  postulate.  That  postulate  will  be  contradicted  if  substance 
and  quality  have  to  remain  in  the  same  locus.  If  inseparability  be 
held  to  be  non-existence  in  different  times,  then  inseparableness 
will  belong  even  to  the  right  and  left  horns  of  a  cow.24  Simi¬ 
larly  if  inseparableness  means  want  of  incompatibility  of  natures, 
then  substance  and  quality  can  have  no  difference  in  essence; 
for  a  quality  is  apprehended  in  identity  with  the  substance.  And 
their  theory  that  the  relation  between  two  things  artificially 
combined  is  conjunction,  but  the  relation  between  two  naturally 
inseparable  categories  is  inherence  is  false;  for  the  cause  existing 
even  before  the  effect  cannot  logically  have  any  inseparability 
from  the  effect.  It  may,  however,  be  maintained  that  this  pro¬ 
position  means  that  one  of  the  two  factors  involved  in  insepa¬ 
rableness,  viz  the  effect  which  is  inseparable  from  the  cause, 
becomes  related  to  the  cause  through  inherence.  Even  so,  the 
effect  which  has  no  pre-existence  and  has  not  emerged  into 
being,  can  have  no  relation  with  the  cause,  since  a  relationship 
is  dependent  on  two  factors. 

Atomist :  The  effect  becomes  related  after  emerging  into 
being. 

Vedantin  :  In  that  case,  if  the  effect  be  admitted  to  have  any 
existence  before  being  related  with  the  cause,  then  the  statement, 
“The  cause  and  effect  can  have  neither  conjunction  nor  dis¬ 
junction,  for  that  would  lead  to  an  absence  of  inseparable  con¬ 
nection”  (Vai.  Su.  VIII.  ii.  13),  will  be  difficult  to  maintain. 
Moreover,  just  as  it  is  held  by  you  that  a  product,  at  the  first 
moment  of  its  emergence,  has  no  action  and  it  remains  related 
to  other  all-pervasive  substances  like  space  through  the  relation¬ 
ship  of  conjunction,  but  not  inherence,  so  also  the  relationship 
between  that  entity  and  its  material  cause  would  be  conjunc¬ 
tion  itself  and  not  inherence.  Besides,  there  is  no  proof  that  the 
relationship  of  either  conjunction  or  inherence  has  any  existence 
apart  from  the  related  factors. 

24  They  are  related  through  inherence  having  been  born  simultaneously. 


II.  ii.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  399 

Atomist :  Conjunction  and  inherence  must  have  separate 
existence  since  words  and  ideas  expressive  of  the  relationships 
of  conjunction  and  inherence  exist  apart  from  the  words  and 
ideas  expressing  the  things  so  related. 

Vedantin  :  This  cannot  be  so,  since  even  when  there  is  but 
a  single  entity,  it  may  give  rise  to  many  words  and  ideas  from 
the  individual  and  relative  points  of  view.  As  for  instance, 
Devadatta  is  one;  but  in  the  world  he  may  be  the  object  of 
many  words  and  ideas,  such  as  a  man,  a  Brahmaria,  well  versed 
in  the  Vedas,  generous,  boyish,  youthful,  old,  a  father,  a  son,  a 
grandson,  a  brother,  a  son-in-law,  and  so  on,  from  his  personal 
and  relative  points  of  view;  or  as  a  digit  (or  line)  though  one, 
may  have  different  words  and  values  to  express  it,  such  as  one, 
ten,  hundred,  thousand,  and  so  on  in  accordance  with  the  posi¬ 
tion  to  which  it  is  shifted.  Similarly  the  related  things  themselves 
come  to  be  associated  with  such  words  and  ideas  as  conjunction 
and  inherence,  rather  than  with  the  words  and  ideas  denoting 
the  two  related  things  themselves;  but  this  does  not  occur 
because  of  the  existence  of  some  distinct  categories  (like  the 
relationships  of  conjunction  and  inherence).  Accordingly,  from 
the  fact  of  the  non-perception  of  some  other  categories  (viz 
such  relationships  as  conjunction  and  inherence),  which  are 
inferred  to  exist  (from  a  supposition  of  their  perception  apart 
from  the  related  things),  it  follows  that  those  other  things  (viz 
relationships)  do  not  exist  (independently). 

Atomist :  If  words  and  ideas  standing  for  relationships  denote 
merely  the  things  related,  then  those  words  and  ideas  standing 
for  relationships  will  persist  for  ever  (that  is  to  say,  words  and 
ideas  expressing  relationships  will  be  present  whenever  the  things 
related  exist). 

Vedantin  :  This  objection  cannot  be  raised,  for  it  was  explained 
earlier  that  words  and  ideas  are  used  from  the  individual  and 
relative  points  of  view. 

Moreover,  atoms,  souls,  and  minds  cannot  have  any  conjunc¬ 
tion,  since  they  are  without  parts;  for  it  is  seen  that  substances 
having  parts  come  in  contact  with  other  substances  having  parts. 

Atomist :  The  atoms,  souls,  and  minds  can  have  imaginary 
parts. 


400  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [H.ii.17 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  if  one  can  resort  to  imagining  the  existence 
of  things  that  do  not  exist,  then  anything  can  be  proved  to 
exist;  and  there  is  no  restriction  to  the  effect  that  such  and  such 
non-existing  things  alone,  and  nothing  else,  are  to  be  imagined 
to  exist  irrespective  of  whether  they  be  contradictory  or  not. 
Besides,  imagination  is  its  own  master  and  it  can  well  be  prolific. 
Moreover,  there  is  no  such  overriding  reason  that  apart  from 
the  six  categories  imagined  by  the  Vai£e$ikas,  other  categories, 
greater  in  number — say  a  hundred  or  a  thousand — are  not  to  be 
imagined.  Accordingly,  anything  that  anyone  likes  will  stand 
established.  Some  kind-hearted  man  may  wish  that  creatures 
may  never  have  this  round  of  birth  and  death,  full  of  misery 
as  it  is;  while  some  hedonist  may  imagine  that  the  liberated 
souls  should  be  bom  again.  Who  can  debar  either  of  them? 
Moreover,  a  dyad,  which  has  parts,  cannot  come  into  intimate 
contact  (or  cohesion)  with  two  partless  ultimate  atoms,  just  as 
much  as  it  can  have  no  intimate  contact  with  space.  For  earth 
etc.  and  space  do  not  come  into  intimate  contact  like  wood 
and  lac. 

Atomist :  Since  the  relationship  of  the  container  and  the  thing 
contained,  subsisting  between  the  two  substances,  viz  the  effect 
and  the  cause,  cannot  be  justified  in  any  other  way,  inherence 
has  to  be  posited  as  a  matter  of  course. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  that  leads  to  the  fallacy  of  mutual  inter¬ 
dependence  (logical  seesaw),  inasmuch  as  the  relationship  of 
the  container  and  the  thing  contained  (or  abode  and  the  abider 
subsisting  between  the  cause  and  the  effect  as  propounded  by 
you)  can  be  established  only  after  the  cause  and  effect  are 
proved  to  be  different,  and  their  difference  can  be  established 
on  the  establishment  of  their  relationship  of  being  the  container 
and  the  thing  contained,  just  as  in  the  case  of  a  basin  and  the 
jujube25  in  it  (which  mutually  distinguish  each  other).  Thus 
ensues  the  fallacy  of  mutual  interdependence  (involving  an 
argument  in  a  circle).  Not  that  any  difference  or  any  relation¬ 
ship  of  the  container  and  the  thing  contained  is  admitted 

*Or  “The  bowl  and  the  berry  tree  (near  it)”  where  the  two  things 
determine  each  other’s  position. 


II.  ii.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  401 

between  the  cause  and  the  effect  by  the  followers  of  Vedanta, 
for  their  position  is  that  the  effect  is  a  peculiar  condition  of 
the  cause  itself. 

There  is  this  additional  argument.  As  the  ultimate  atoms  are 
limited  in  size,  they  must  have  as  many  surfaces  (or  parts)  as 
there  are  directions — be  they  six,  eight,  or  ten;  and  having  parts, 
they  will  be  impermanent.  Thus  the  view  that  they  are  perma¬ 
nent  and  partless  will  be  nullified. 

Atomist :  The  very  parts,  that  you  assume  to  be  defined  by 
the  different  directions,  are  exactly  the  so  many  atoms  admitted 
by  me. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  all  things  are  subject  to  destruction 
through  a  process  of  change  from  the  gross  to  the  fine,  till  they 
reach  the  ultimate  cause  (which  must  be  Brahman).  For  instance, 
earth,  which,  though  a  substance,  gets  destroyed,  it  being  the 
grossest  in  comparison  with  the  dyads  etc.;  then  the  subtle 
substances  that  belong  to  the  same  class  as  earth,  but  are  subtler 
than  earth,  get  destroyed;  then  the  dyad  disintegrates;  so  also 
the  ultimate  atoms  too  will  disintegrate,  since  they  belong  to 
the  same  class  as  earth. 

Atomist :  Even  while  getting  destroyed,  they  disintegrate 
merely  through  a  process  of  being  divided  into  their  parts;  (but 
ultimate  atoms  do  not  disintegrate,  since  they  are  partless). 

Vedantin :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  for  we  said  that  destruc¬ 
tion  may  take  the  form  of  the  cessation  of  solidity,  as  in  the 
case  of  a  lump  of  clarified  butter  (ghee).  Just  as  in  the  cases  of 
ghee  or  gold,  though  there  is  no  destruction  of  their  parts,  still 
a  destruction  of  their  solidity  may  take  place  on  becoming 
liquefied  by  coming  in  contact  with  fire,  even  so  in  the  case 
of  the  ultimate  atoms  there  may  be  a  destruction  of  grossness 
etc.  by  their  reversion  to  the  ultimate  cause.  Similarly  an  effect 
is  not.  produced  merely  by  a  conjunction  of  parts;  for  milk, 
water,  etc.  are  seen  to  turn  into  curd,  ice,  etc.  even  without 
the  addition  of  parts.  Thus  since  this  doctrine  of  the  atoms  as 
the  cause  is  based  on  such  comparatively  hollow  grounds,  since 
it  runs  counter  to  the  Vedic  texts  holding  forth  God  as  the 
cause,  and  since  it  is  not  accepted  by  such  worthy  persons  as 
Manu  and  others  who  abide  by  the  Vedas,  therefore  it  is  to  be 
26 


402  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.ii.17 

entirely  ignored.  “Ignored  by  all  respectable  persons  aspiring 
for  the  highest  good” — this  much  has  to  be  supplied  at  the 
end  (of  the  aphorism). 

Topic  4:  Refutation  of  Buddhist  Realists 

It  has  been  said  that  the  doctrine  of  the  Vaise$ika  is  not  to 
be  relied  on  since  it  is  bolstered  up  by  bad  logic,  it  goes  against 
the  Vedas,  and  it  is  not  accepted  by  the  worthy  people.  This  is 
semi-nihilistic  having  an  affinity  with  nihilism;  and  hence  we 
now  proceed  to  show  that  the  conclusions  of  the  full  nihilist 
are  to  be  ignored  all  the  more.26  That  nihilism,  again,  takes 
various  forms  in  accordance  with  the  doctrinal  difference  (in 
the  presentation  by  one  who  explains)  or  the  mental  calibre  of 
those  who  are  taught.  Among  them  there  are  three  schools: 
some  are  Sarvastitvavadins  (divided  into  the  Sautrantikas  and 
Vaibhasikas,  believing  respectively  in  the  inferential  and  percep¬ 
tual  existence  of  all  things);  some  are  Vijnanavadins  (or 
Yogacaras,  believing  in  the  existence  of  consciousness  or  ideas 
alone);  while  others  are  Sarvasunyavadins  (or  Madhyamikas, 
denying  the  existence  of  everything),  (i.e.  they  are  realists, 
idealists,  and  nihilists  respectively).  Now  we  first  refute  those 
Sarvastitvavadins  who  admit  both  external  things,  viz  the  ele¬ 
ments  and  elementals,  and  the  internal  things,  viz  the  citta  and 
caittas.  Of  these  the  elements  are  earth  and  other  materials. 
The  elementals  are  colour  etc.  and  organs  of  sight  etc.  The 
four  kinds  of  atoms  of  earth  etc.  which  have  the  characteristics 
of  solidity,  fluidity,  heat,  and  motion,  get  massed  together  in 
the  form  of  (gross)  earth  etc.  This  is  how  they  think.  So  also 
there  are  the  five  skandhas ,  (groups),  viz  the  group  of  colour 
(consisting  of  the  sense-organs  and  their  objects),  the  group  of 
egoism  ( dlaya-vijnana — rousing  constantly  the  idea  of  “I”);  the 
group  of  feelings  (of  happiness  etc.),  the  group  of  conceptual 
knowledge  (such  as  “this  is  a  cow”  and  so  on),  and  the  group 


®*The  Vaisesika  thinks  some  things  are  permanent  while  others  get 
destroyed  and  vanish  into  nothing.  This  partial  nihilism  being  unaccept¬ 
able,  full  nihilism  is  unacceptable  all  the  more. 


IT.  ii.  18]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  403 

of  attitudes  (of  liking,  disliking,  delusion,  merit,  demerit).27 
These  also  combine  to  form  the  basis  of  all  internal  dealings. 
This  is  how  they  think. 

With  regard  to  this,  we  say: 

adrift:  \\\m\ 

arfa  Even  in  (the  supposed)  combination 

arising  from  either  of  the  causes  ^-snrrfH:  that  (combination) 
will  not  be  achieved. 

18.  Even  if  the  integration  be  supposed  to  arise  from  either 
of  the  causes ,  that  will  not  be  achieved . 

From  either  point  of  view  “that  will  not  be  achieved”,  there 
will  not  emerge  any  combination  (or  integration)  that  is  sup¬ 
posed  by  others  to  have  these  two  kinds  of  causes  and  to  be  of 
those  two  kinds.  Even  if  the  combination  be  supposed  to  arise 
from  either  of  the  two  sets  of  causes,  that  will  not  materialize, 
that  is  to  say,  no  combination  will  result — be  it  either  a  combina¬ 
tion  of  the  elements  and  the  elementals  arising  from  the  atoms, 
or  a  combination  of  the  five  groups  of  things  arising  from  those 
groups. 

Why? 

Because  the  components  of  such  a  combination  are  insentient 
and  because  consciousness  can  flash  (from  a  contact  between 
sense-organs  and  objects)  only  if  a  combination  of  things 
(forming  the  body  etc.)  is  already  there,  and  because  no  other 
steady  and  independent  entity  is  admitted  which  is  sentient,  an 
experiencer,  and  a  ruler,  and  which  can  bring  about  the  combi¬ 
nation.  If  impulsion  to  activity  be  postulated  for  them  indepen¬ 
dently  of  any  agent,  then  there  will  be  the  possibility  of  such 
impulsion  continuing  interminably.28  Again,  since  currents  (of 
ego-consciousness)  cannot  be  determined  to  be  either  different 
or  non-different  (from  the  individual  forms  of  consciousness 
constituting  the  current),  and  since  everything  (including  the 

27  Of  these,  egoism  is  called  citta,  and  the  other  four  groups  go  by  the 
name  of  caittas. 

23  So  there  will  be  no  liberation. 


404 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  ii.  18 


current)  is  supposed  to  be  momentary,  there  can  be  no  activity 
(in  this  momentary  current),  and  hence  no  impulsion  (apart 
from  its  own  birth).  Therefore  a  combination  cannot  emerge, 
and  in  the  absence  of  combination,  all  mundane  existence 
dependent  on  it  will  be  nullified. 


On  account  of  being  the  cause  of  one 
another,  (a  combination  will  be  possible)  ^  if  this  be  the 
position,  ?r  it  cannot  be  ^ f fail for  (each  is 
merely  the  cause  of  the  origin  (of  another  just  succeeding). 

19.  If  it  be  argued  that  a  combination  becomes  possible  since 
(\ nescience  and  the  rest)  can  be  the  causes  of  one  another  (in  a 
successive  series ),  then  we  say ,  no,  (for  nescience  etc.)  can 
each  merely  be  the  cause  of  origin  of  another  just  succeeding. 

Buddhist :  Even  if  no  sentient  and  steady  experiencer  or  ruler 
be  admitted  as  the  agent  bringing  about  the  combination,  still 
the  transmigratory  existence  will  be  possible,  since  nescience 
and  the  rest  are  the  causes  of  one  another;  and  if  the  trans¬ 
migratory  existence  becomes  a  possibility,  there  remains  no  need 
for  depending  on  anything  else.  Those  nescience  etc.  are: 
nescience  (the  idea  of  permanence  with  regard  to  things  momen¬ 
tary),  attitudes  (attachment,  detachment,  and  delusion  arising 
from  that  false  knowledge),  ego-consciousness,  name  (i.e.  the 
four  elements  depending  on  names),  form  (or  colour),  the  six 
sense-organs  (having  egoism,  four  elements,  and  form  as  their 
habitations),  touch  (contact  among  name,  form,  and  senses), 
sensation,  thirst  (for  objects),  impulsion  (caused  by  that  thirst), 
merit  etc.  (which  are  the  sources  of  birth),  birth  (of  the  body), 
maturity  (of  the  groups  coming  into  being),  death,  sorrow, 
wailing,  pain,  misery,  etc.  (i.e.  evils  like  honour,  dishonour,  etc.) 
— these  and  others  of  the  same  class  which  are  sometimes  indi¬ 
cated  briefly  or  sometimes  stated  elaborately  in  the  books  of 
the  Buddhists.  These  categories  cannot  be  denied  by  other 
schools  as  well.  So  may  it  not  be  that  when  these  nescience  and 
the  rest  go  on  revolving  for  ever  like  (the  cups  in)  a  Persian 


II.  ii.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  405 

wheel,  as  the  cause  and  effect  of  one  another,  a  combination  of 
things,  emerging  out  of  the  force  of  circumstances,  becomes  a 
possibility? 

Vedantin :  That  cannot  be  so. 

Why? 

Because  they  are  merely  the  causes  of  the  origination  (of 
one  another).  A  combination  may  be  possible  if  any  cause  for 
the  combination  can  be  ascertained;  but  as  a  fact,  it  cannot  be 
ascertained.  For  although  nescience  etc.  be  the  causes  of  one 
another,  the  earlier  ones  will  merely  give  rise  to  the  later  ones. 
That  may  well  be  so;  but  nothing  can  possibly  become  the 
source  of  a  combination. 

Buddhist :  Did  we  not  mention  earlier  that  nescience  and  the 
rest  (revolving  in  order)  lead  to  the  assumption  of  the  existence 
of  a  combination  by  implication? 

Vedantin :  To  this  we  say:  If  your  idea  is  that  since  nescience 
etc.  cannot  emerge  unless  there  is  a  combination  (in  the  form  of 
a  body),  therefore  they,  as  a  matter  of  course,  imply  its  exist¬ 
ence,  then  you  have  still  to  tell  me  the  cause  of  that  combina¬ 
tion.  But  in  the  course  of  examining  the  Vaise$ika  theory  we 
said  that  this  is  not  possible  even  on  the  assumption  of  perma¬ 
nent  atoms  and  experiencing  souls  which  can  sustain  the 
acquired  merits;  and  can  this  be  possible  here,  my  dear  friend, 
simply  by  assuming  momentary  atoms  which  have  no  experi¬ 
ences  and  which  are  not  related  with  everything  by  way  of 
being  the  abider  and  the  abode  (or  the  benefited  and  the  bene¬ 
factor)?29  On  the  other  hand,  if  this  be  your  idea  that  nescience 
and  the  rest  themselves  constitute  the  source  of  combination, 
then  how  can  they  be  the  source  of  that  combination  when 
they  themselves  have  to  emerge  into  being  by  depending  on 
that  combination?  Or  if  you  think  that  the  combinations  them¬ 
selves  recur  constantly  like  a  current  in  this  beginningless 
world,  and  nescience  etc.  are  sustained  by  them,  even  then, 
when  one  combination  emerges  out  of  another,  it  will  be  either 
regularly  similar  or  irregularly  similar  or  dissimilar.  If  regularity 

29  Or  according  to  a  different  reading,  “experiencer  and  accomplisher  of 
combination”. 


406  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  ii.  19 

be  admitted,  then  a  human  body  can  have  no  possibility  of 
being  transformed  into  divine,  animal,  or  hellish  bodies.  And  if 
irregularity  be  admitted,  then  a  human  body  may  at  times  turn 
momentarily  into  an  elephant,  and  then  be  transformed  again 
into  a  godly  or  human  form.  But  either  point  of  view  goes 
against  your  own  position.  Moreover,  your  theory  is  that  there 
is  no  permanent  experiencer  for  whose  experience  the  combina¬ 
tion  (i.e.  body)  should  come  into  being.  That  means  that  an 
experience  occurs  merely  for  the  sake  of  experience,  and  there 
need  be  none  else  to  desire  it.  Similarly  liberation  will  occur  for 
its  own  sake,  and  so  there  need  be  none  else  to  want  liberation. 
Were  there  somebody  else  who  could  desire  these,  then  he 
would  be  present  both  during  the  times  of  experience  and 
liberation.  And  if  he  does  so,  the  doctrine  of  momentariness  will 
be  negated.  So  even  if  nescience  etc.  be  the  sources  of  the 
emergence  of  one  another,  let  them  be  so;  still  no  integration 
(into  a  body)  will  be  achieved  thereby,  for  there  is  none  to 
experience.  This  is  the  idea. 

^  iroii 

x[  And  because  the  earlier  one  gets  obliterated 

when  the  succeeding  one  originates. 

20 .  And  because  the  earlier  is  negated  when  the  later  emerges , 
(therefore  nescience  and  the  rest  cannot  each  be  the  cause  of 
the  next  in  the  series ). 

It  has  been  stated  that  since  nescience  etc.  are  merely  the 
causes  for  the  origin  of  one  another  (successively),  the  forma¬ 
tion  of  an  aggregation  cannot  be  achieved.  But  now  it  is  being 
shown  that  even  this  assumption  of  being  the  cause  of  origin 
is  not  tenable.  The  postulate  of  those  who  swear  by  momentari¬ 
ness  is  that  with  the  emergence  of  the  entity  of  the  succeeding 
moment,  the  entity  of  the  earlier  moment  is  obliterated.  But  one 
who  postulates  like  this  cannot  establish  any  relationship  of 
cause  and  effect  between  the  two  entities  of  preceding  and 
succeeding  moments.  For  the  entity  of  the  preceding  moment 
that  is  getting  obliterated  or  is  already  obliterated  is  involved  in 


II.  ii.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  .407 

non-existence,  and  as  such  it  cannot  reasonably  be  the  cause  of 
the  entity  of  the  next  moment.  If,  however,  the  idea  be  that 
the  entity  of  the  earlier  moment  becomes  the  cause  of  the  next 
when  the  former  has  actually  emerged  into  being  and  is  in  a 
state  of  positive  existence,  still  it  cannot  become  the  cause  of 
the  entity  of  the  next  moment;  for  if  any  operative  activity  be 
assumed  for  a  thing  that  has  come  into  existence  at  an  earlier 
moment,  then  the  contingency  will  arise  of  its  becoming  asso¬ 
ciated  with  a  subsequent  moment  (when  the  activity  occurs). 
Again,  if  it  be  held  that  its  operative  activity  (i.e.  causality) 
consists  in  its  mere  presence,  still  this  is  unjustifiable;  for  no 
effect  can  emerge  that  is  not  transfused  with  the  essence  of  the 
material  cause.  If,  however,  it  be  assumed  that  the  essence  of 
the  cause  persists  in  the  effect,  then  you  will  be  forced  to  give 
up  the  theory  of  momentariness  owing  to  the  presence  of  the 
essence  of  the  material  cause  during  the  (succeeding)  time  that 
the  effect  lasts.  If  causality  be  admitted  even  without  any  trans¬ 
fusion  of  the  effect  by  the  essence  of  the  cause,  then  it  can  be 
had  anywhere;  and  so  this  will  lead  to  the  predicament  of  an 
unwarrantedlv  wide  application  (i.e.  this  causality  of  anything 
may  be  assumed  anywhere). 

Moreover,  origination  and  annihilation  must  be  the  very 
nature  of  things,  or  some  states  of  them,  or  some  new  things. 
None  of  these  alternatives  can  be  reasonably  upheld.  If  origina¬ 
tion  and  annihilation  be  the  same  as  the  very  nature  of  a  thing, 
then  the  word  “thing”  and  the  terms  “origination  and  annihila¬ 
tion”  will  become  synonymous.  If,  however,  you  think  that 
there  is  some  distinction  and  that  by  the  terms  origination  and 
annihilation  are  meant  the  first  and  last  states  of  a  tiling  which  is 
itself  in  a  state  intermediate  between  the  two,  even  then  the 
theory  of  momentarincss  will  be  destroyed,  since  the  thing  will 
get  related  to  three  moments — the  first,  the  intermediate,  and 
the  last.  Again,  if  origination  and  annihilation  be  absolutely 
disconnected  with  the  thing  like  a  horse  and  a  buffalo,  then  the 
thing  will  become  permanent,  since  it  will  not  have  any  connec¬ 
tion  with  either  origination  or  annihilation.  Even  if  the  origina¬ 
tion  and  annihilation  consist  in  the  perception  and  non-percep¬ 
tion  of  the  thing,  still  these  (perception  and  non-perception) 


408  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA5YA  [II.ii.20 

will  be  merely  the  qualities  of  the  perceiver  and  not  of  the 
thing;  and  so  the  predicament  of  the  thing  becoming  permanent 
will  be  just  the  same.  From  this  viewpoint  also,  the  Buddhist 
doctrine  is  illogical. 

SlfaiifaM  IRtll 

aRlfd  In  the  absence  (of  cause)  srfd^T-^TTW:  the  proposition 
will  fall  through  apq’sn’  else  simultaneity  (will  take 

place). 

21.  (If  it  be  contended  that  the  effect  arises)  even  when  there 
is  no  cause ,  then  your  assertion  (of  causation)  will  be  stultified; 
else  (if  you  contend  that  the  entity  of  the  earlier  moment 
continues  till  the  entity  of  the  later  moment  emerges ) ,  the 
cause  and  effect  will  exist  simultaneously . 

It  has  been  said  that  since,  according  to  the  theory  of 
momentariness,  the  entity  of  the  earlier  moment  is  swallowed  up 
into  annihilation,  it  cannot  be  the  cause  of  the  entity  of  the 
later  moment.  Should  the  Buddhists  now  assert  that  the  effect 
arises  even  in  the  absence  of  the  cause,  their  own  assertion  will 
be  nullified,  that  is  to  say,  their  proposition  that  the  perception 
of  colour  etc.  and  happiness  etc.  ( citta  and  caitta)  arises  as  a 
result  of  acquiring  the  four  kinds  of  causes30  (objects,  senses, 
accessories,  and  past  tendency),  will  be  negated.  And  if  origina¬ 
tion  be  without  any  cause,  then  anything  may  originate  any¬ 
where,  for  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  this.  Should  they,  however, 
assert  that  the  entity  of  the  earlier  moment  continues  till  the 
origination  of  the  entity  of  the  later  moment,  then  the  cause 
and  effect  will  become  simultaneous.  Even  so,  their  assertion 
will  be  contradicted  just  the  same;  their  declaration  that  all 
entities  are  momentary  will  stand  discredited. 

ifa'Oq  1ST I IV* II 

5r%H^T-3nrf*ra^n'-pTT>r-3rErTfH:  There  can  be  no  arrival  at 

"In  the  case  of  a  perception  of  blueness,  blue  is  the  alambana-pratyaya , 
eye  is  the  adhipati-pratyciya,  light  is  the  sabakari-pratyaya ,  and  the  impres¬ 
sion  of  a  similar  earlier  perception  is  the  samamarapurva-pratyaya . 


II.  ii.  22] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


409 


artificial  annihilation  and  natural  annihilation  on  ac¬ 

count  of  non-termination. 

22.  Neither  pratisamkhya-nirodha  (artificial  annihilation)  nor 
an  apratisamkhyd-nirodha  (natural  annihilation)  is  possible ,  for 
there  can  be  no  cessation  ( either  of  the  current  or  of  the  individ¬ 
uals  forming  the  current). 

Moreover,  the  nihilists  (i.e.  Buddhists)  fancy  that  whatever 
becomes  an  object  of  knowledge  and  is  different  from  the  three 
categories,  has  an  origination  and  is  momentary.  As  for  the  three, 
they  say,  they  are  these — pratisamkhya-nirodha  (artificial  anni¬ 
hilation),  apratisamkhyd-nirodha  (natural  annihilation),  and 
akdsa.  They  think  that  all  these  three  are  non-substantial,  non¬ 
existent,  and  illusory.  The  annihilation  of  a  thing  brought  about 
deliberately  is  technically  called  pratisanikhyd-nirodha ;  the  op¬ 
posite  of  that  is  apratisamkhyd-nirodha  (natural  annihilation); 
and  akdsa  is  the  mere  absence  of  any  obstruction  (or  screening). 
The  aphorist  will  refute  their  akdsa  later  on.  The  two  kinds  of 
annihilation  are  now  being  refuted.  “There  can  be  no  arrival  at”, 
that  is  to  say,  there  can  be  no  possibility  of  the  two  kinds  of 
annihilation,  artificial  and  natural. 

Why? 

“Because  there  can  be  no  cessation.”  These  two  kinds  of 
annihilation — artificial  and  natural — will  be  perceivable  in  rela¬ 
tion  to  either  the  chain  of  causality  or  the  individuals  (forming 
the  chain).  But  they  cannot  relate  to  the  chain.  Since  in  all  the 
chains,  the  individuals  forming  the  chain  continue  uninter¬ 
ruptedly  as  a  succession  of  causes  and  effects,  therefore  the 
chains  cannot  cease.  They  cannot  relate  to  the  individuals, 
because  the  individuals  can  have  no  such  destruction  as  to  leave 
no  trace  of  recognition  or  to  become  non-existent,  for  under 
all  circumstances,  the  common  (material)  substratum  is  seen 
through  a  process  of  recognition  to  persist  uninterruptedly.31 
Where  such  recognitions  are  not  obvious,  the  persistence  of  the 
common  substratum  can  be  inferred  from  the  fact  of  its  percep- 

#1In  a  pot,  potsherd,  and  dust,  the  same  earth  is  recognized  as  the 
common  material. 


410  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  [II.  ii.  22 

don  elsewhere.82  Hence  annihilation  of  either  kind,  fancied  by 
others,  is  untenable. 


3WTT  ^  staler  ll^ll 

^  And  owing  to  defect  from  either  point  of 

view. 

23.  And  (the  Buddhist  view  is  untenable)  owing  to  defect 
arising  from  either  point  of  view . 

The  annihilation  of  nescience  and  the  rest,  that  is  assumed  by 
the  others  and  is  classified  under  the  heads  of  artificial  and 
natural  annihilations,  must  be  achieved  either  as  a  result  of 
complete  knowledge  associated  with  its  accessories  (of  self- 
control  etc.)  or  (spontaneously)  by  itself.  On  the  first  assump¬ 
tion  will  arise  the  predicament  of  discarding  the  theory  of 
destruction  being  an  uncaused  event.  On  the  second  assumption 
will  arise  the  predicament  of  instruction  about  the  spiritual 
path  (as  taught  by  Buddha)  becoming  useless.  Thus,  being 
subject  to  defects  from  either  point  of  view,  this  philosophy  is 
incoherent. 


iryii 

tt  And  OR  account  of  absence  of  dissimilarity 

in  the  case  of  space. 

24.  And  ( non-existence  cannot  be  asserted)  in  the  case  of 
akaia  on  account  of  the  absence  of  (its)  dissimilarity  (with 
destruction ). 

As  for  their  view  that  the  two  kinds  of  destruction  and 
akasa  have  no  reality,  we  have  already  refuted  the  assertion  that 
the  two  kinds  of  destruction  are  nonentities.  Now  it  is  being 
refuted  that  akasa  is  a  nonentity.  It  is  unreasonable  to  assert 
with  regard  to  akasa  that  it  is  a  nonentity,  for  even  in  its  case 

“Doubt  may  arise,  for  instance,  in  the  case  of  the  seed  becoming  the 
sprout,  but  the  process  of  inference  with  regard  to  persistence  of  earth, 
can  be  extended  to  this  case  as  well. 


[I.  ii.  25]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  411 

nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  knowing  it  as  an  entity  equally 
like  the  artificial  and  natural  destructions.  As  for  Vedic  proof, 
it  is  established  from  such  Vedic  texts  as,  * Akdsa  originated  from 
the  Self  (Tai.  II.  i.  2),  that  akdsa  is  a  substance.  But  for  those 
who  are  not  convinced  by  Vedic  texts,  it  can  be  inferred 
through  its  quality  of  sound,  for  qualities  such  as  smell  and  the 
rest  are  seen  to  abide  in  substances  like  earth  and  the  rest.  More¬ 
over,  according  to  you,  dkasa  is  merely  an  absence  of  obstruc¬ 
tion  (or  covering).  So  when  any  one  bird  flies  in  space,  there 
is  the  presence  of  obstruction  (and  so  absence  of  space);  hence 
another  bird  that  may  try  to  fly  will  find  no  scope  for  doing  so. 

Opponent :  It  will  fly  where  there  is  no  obstruction. 

Vedantin  :  In  that  case,  that  very  tiling  with  the  help  of 
which  “the  absence  of  obstruction”  is  specified,  will  itself  be 
the  positive  entity  akdsa,33  and  it  will  not  be  a  mere  absence  of 
obstruction.  Moreover,  when  the  Buddhist  asserts  that  akdsa 
consists  in  a  mere  absence  of  obstruction,  he  lands  himself  into 
a  self-contradiction.  For  according  to  the  Buddhist  view,  in  the 
chain  of  questions  starting  with,  “Sir,  on  what  does  earth  rest?” 
occurs  this  question  after  earth  etc.,  “On  what  does  air  rest?” 
And  the  answer  to  that  question  is,  “Air  rests  on  dkdSa”,  That 
becomes  logically  consistent  if  akdsa  is  a  substance.  For  this 
reason  also  it  is  illogical  to  say  akdsa  is  a  nonentity.  Besides, 
it  is  contradictory  to  say  that  the  two  kinds  of  annihilation  and 
akdsa. — these  three  are  nonentities  and  yet  they  are  eternal;  for 
that  which  is  non-existent  can  neither  be  eternal  nor  non-eternal, 
for  all  judgements  about  relationship,  as  between  a  quality  and 
the  thing  possessing  it,  are  based  on  the  existence  of  something. 
And  if  such  a  relationship,  as  between  a  quality  and  the  thing 
qualified,  does  exist,  then  this  will  inevitably  mean  that  the  thing 
itself  is  as  much  real  as  a  pot,  for  instance,  and  it  cannot  be  a 
nonentity. 

appear  irvui 

^  And  on  account  of  remembrance. 


For,  a  negation  presupposes  the  existence  of  its  counterpart. 


412  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.ii.25 

25.  And  (a  permanent  soul  has  to  be  admitted)  because  of  the 
fact  of  remembrance  ( i.e .  memory ). 

Moreover,  when  the  nihilist  asserts  all  things  to  be  momentary, 
he  will  have  to  assert  the  perceiver  also  to  be  momentary.  But 
that  is  an  absurdity  because  of  the  fact  of  remembrance. 
Remembrance  means  recalling  to  mind  something  after  its  per¬ 
ception,  and  that  can  happen  only  when  the  agent  of  perception 
and  memory  is  the  same;  for  one  person  is  not  seen  to  remember 
something  perceived  by  another.  How  can  there  be  an  aware¬ 
ness  of  the  form,  “I  who  saw  earlier  see  now”,  arise  unless  the 
earlier  and  later  perceiver  be  the  same?  Moreover,  it  is  well 
known  to  all  that  direct  experience  in  the  form  of  recognition, 
such  as  “I  who  saw  that,  see  this  now”,  occurs  only  when  the 
agent  of  seeing  and  remembering  is  the  same.  Should  their  agents 
be  different,  then  the  awareness  will  take  such  a  form,  “I  remem¬ 
ber,  but  somebody  else  saw”;  but  nobody  in  fact  experiences  in 
this  way.  Where  cognition  takes  such  a  form,  all  understand  the 
agents  of  seeing  and  remembering  to  be  different,  as  for  instance 
in,  “I  remember  that  he  saw  this  then”.  But  in  the  present  case 
where  occurs  the  remembrance  of  the  form,  “I  saw  this  then”, 
even  the  nihilist  understands  the  agent  of  seeing  and  remember¬ 
ing  to  be  but  he  himself,  and  he  does  not  deny  his  own  past  vision 
by  saying,  “I  did  not  see  that”,  just  as  much  as  he  would  not 
deny  that  fire  is  hot  or  that  it  emits  light.  That  being  the  case, 
the  nihilist  cannot  avoid  a  rebuttal  of  his  theory  of  momentari¬ 
ness  in  the  face  of  a  single  agent  becoming  connected  with  the 
two  moments  of  perception  and  remembrance.  And  why  should 
not  the  nihilist  be  ashamed  of  himself  when  he  holds  on  to  the 
theory  of  momentariness  at  the  same  time  that  he  recognizes 
all  his  perceptions  from  now  on  to  the  last  breath  and  the  past 
ones  from  his  very  birth  till  now  as  having  happened  to  his  own 
very  same  self? 

If  he  should  maintain  that  this  can  come  about  through  simi¬ 
larity,  then  he  should  be  answered  thus:  Since  similarity,  which 
is  apparent  in  such  a  judgement  as  “This  is  similar  to  that”,  is 
dependent  on  two  factors,  and  since  from  the  point  of  view  of 
the  believer  in  momentariness,  there  is  no  single  perceiver  of 


II.ii.25] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


413 


two  similar  things,  it  amounts  to  a  false  incoherent  jargon  on 
his  part  to  assert  that  recognition  results  from  similarity.  This 
can  only  be  possible  if  the  perceiver  of  the  similarity  of  the 
entities  of  the  preceding  and  succeeding  moments  be  the  same. 
But  then  the  theory  of  momentariness  will  be  adversely  affected 
on  account  of  the  presence  of  the  same  person  during  two 
moments. 

Buddhist :  The  cognition,  “This  is  like  that”,  is  an  entirely 
new  cognition  which  is  not  dependent  on  the  perception  of  the 
things  of  the  earlier  and  succeeding  moments. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  in  the  awareness,  “This  is  like  that”,  are 
involved  (three)  distinct  factors.34  If  this  experience  of  similarity 
be  an  independent  experience  (not  related  to  the  two  similar 
factors),  then  the  expression,  “This  is  like  that”,  would  be 
meaningless,  and  the  expression  would  simply  be  “similarity”.35 
If  people  engaged  in  judging  something  do  not  take  into  account 
the  facts  that  are  universally  accepted,  then  even  after  the  state¬ 
ment  of  the  validity  of  one’s  own  point  of  view  and  the  invalid¬ 
ity  of  one’s  opponent’s  view  it  will  not  appear  to  be  convincing 
to  the  intellect  of  either  the  judges  or  oneself.  That  alone 
should  be  spoken  of  which  has  been  ascertained  as,  “This  tiling 
is  certainly  so”.  Were  one  to  speak  of  something  other  than 
this,  one  would  simply  expose  one’s  garrulousness.  Moreover, 
human  dealings  cannot  be  said  to  be  dependent  on  mere  simi¬ 
larity,  for  the  experience  is  of  the  existence  of  the  entity  itself 
(expressing  itself  as,  “I  am  that  very  person”)  and  not  of  mere 
similarity  with  that  (as  would  be  expressed  in,  “I  am  like  that 
person”).  It  may  be  conceded,  however,  that  in  the  case  of  an 
external  thing  there  may  be  the  possibility  of  doubt  of  the 
form,  “It  may  be  either  that  very  thing  or  similar  to  that”,  for 
in  the  case  of  an  external  thing  there  is  scope  for  delusion.  But 
in  the  case  of  the  cognizer  himself  there  can  never  be  such  a 
doubt  as,  “I  may  be  either  that  very  person  or  similar  to  him”. 


“This,  that,  and  the  similarity. 

“True  judgement  requires  a  consideration  of  both  points  of  view,  and 
that  cuts  at  the  root  of  the  theory  of  momentariness,  since  such  a 
consideration  spreads  over  several  moments. 


414 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[II.  ii.  25 


For  there  occurs  a  definite  recognition  of  identity,  as  in,  “I  who 
saw  yesterday,  am  remembering  today”.  For  this  reason  also, 
the  nihilist  theory  cannot  be  reasonably  sustained. 

The  nihilist  theory  is  untenable  for  this  additional  reason  that 
the  nihilists  do  not  admit  any  lasting  and  persisting  cause  (inher¬ 
ing  in  the  effect),  so  that  their  view  amounts  to  saying  that 
something  comes  out  of  nothing.  And  they  show  that  existence 
comes  out  of  non-existence  when  they  assert,  “The  effect  cannot 
arise  without  destroying  the  cause;  for  the  sprout  comes  out  of 
a  seed  when  the  latter  is  destroyed  and  a  pot  out  of  a  lump  of 
clay  when  the  latter  is  destroyed.  Were  a  product  to  come  out 
of  an  unchanging  cause,  anything  could  come  out  of  anything 
and  anywhere;  for  the  cause  is  common  to  all”.  Thus  since 
(according  to  them)  the  sprout  and  the  rest  emerge  from  the 
seed  and  the  rest  when  these  latter  get  swallowed  up  in  non¬ 
existence,  they  conclude  that  existence  comes  out  of  non-exist¬ 
ence.  With  regard  to  this  we  say: 

IR^II 

Not  3TCRT:  from  non-existence,  because  this  is  not 

seen  (thus). 

26.  Something  does  not  come  out  of  nothing ,  for  this  does 
not  accord  'with  experience . 

Existence  does  not  come  out  of  non-existence.  If  something 
can  come  out  of  nothing,  then  it  becomes  useless  to  refer  to 
special  kinds  of  causes,  since  non-existence  as  such  is  indistin¬ 
guishable  everywhere.  There  is  no  distinction,  as  regards  the 
nature  of  non-existence,  between  the  non-existence  arising  from 
the  destruction  of  the  seed  and  the  rest  and  the  horn  of  a  hare, 
both  being  equally  unsubstantial  (false).  Had  there  been  any 
distinction,  then  only  would  the  assertion  of  such  separate 
causality  be  meaningful  as,  “The  sprout  comes  out  of  the  seed 
alone,  and  the  curd  out  of  the  milk  alone”.  But  when  an  indis¬ 
tinguishable  non-existence  is  posited  as  the  cause,  the  sprout 
and  the  rest  may  as  well  spring  out  of  a  hare’s  horn  and  the 


II.ii.26]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  415 

like.  This  is,  however,  contradicted  by  experience.  If,  again, 
distinctive  attributes  be  ascribed  to  non-existence  on  the  analogy 
of  the  lotus  etc.  having  blueness  etc.,  then  on  that  very  analogy 
of  the  lotus  etc.,  non-existence  will  turn  into  existence  by  the 
very  fact  of  possessing  distinctive  qualities.  Moreover,  non¬ 
existence  can  never  be  the  source  of  anything,  precisely  because 
it  is  non-existent  like  the  hare’s  horn  etc.  Were  existence  to 
arise  out  of  non-existence,  all  the  effects  would  be  imbued  with 
non-existence.  But  that  goes  against  experience,  for  all  things 
are  perceived  to  exist  as  positive  entities  with  their  respective 
distinguishing  features.  Not  that  anybody  will  admit  that  such 
real  objects  as  earthen  plates  etc.,  in  which  earth  inheres,  are  the 
transformations  of  threads  for  instance.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
people  perceive  all  real  earthen  things  as  the  transformations  of 
earth  itself. 

As  for  the  assertion  that  something  can  come  out  of  nothing 
since  no  immutable  thing  can  become  a  cause  unless  it  be  by 
destroying  its  real  nature,  that  is  a  wrong  assertion;  for  gold 
and  the  rest  that  are  recognized  as  remaining  unchanged  assume 
the  roles  of  such  cause  and  effect  in  the  cases  of  products  like 
a  gold  necklace  and  so  on.  Even  in  the  cases  of  the  seed  and 
the  rest  where  there  is  an  appearance  of  destruction  of  substance, 
it  is  not  the  earlier  state,  undergoing  destruction,  that  is  under¬ 
stood  to  be  the  cause  of  the  subsequent  state;  for  what  is  admit¬ 
ted  is  that  those  parts  (or  cells)  of  the  seed  and  the  rest  which 
remain  undestroyed  and  which  persist  (in  the  sprouts  and  the 
rest)  become  the  material  causes  of  the  sprout  and  the  rest. 
Accordingly  since  nothing  that  actually  exists  is  seen  to  result 
from  nonentities  like  the  horn  of  a  hare  etc.,  and  since  it  is  seen 
that  from  existing  tilings  like  gold  etc.  originate  existing  things 
(like  necklace  etc.),  the  assertion  of  something  coming  out  of 
nothing  cannot  be  substantiated.  Moreover,  all  people  get 
deluded  by  the  nihilists  (i.e.  Buddhists)  who  first  assert  that  the 
ego-consciousness  and  the  mental  moods  arise  from  the  four 
causes  and  that  the  aggregates  of  elements  and  elementals  arise 
from  the  atoms  (sec  p.  405),  and  then  again  assume  that  some¬ 
thing  comes  out  of  nothing  and  thus  negate  their  own  assertions. 


27.  And  (if  something  can  come  out  of  nothing ,  then)  on 
the  same  ground ,  success  should  come  even  to  the  indifferent 
people . 

Moreover,  if  it  be  admitted  that  something  can  come  out  of 
nothing,  then  on  the  same  ground  even  the  indifferent  people 
who  are  inactive  should  attain  their  desired  results,  for  non¬ 
existence  is  clearly  evident  even  there;  and  so  a  husbandman 
who  does  not  engage  in  cultivation  should  get  his  crop,  a  potter 
who  makes  no  effort  for  preparing  the  clay  should  get  his 
vessels  ready,  and  a  weaver  who  does  not  make  any  effort  for 
weaving  the  yarn  should  get  a  cloth  just  as  much  as  one  that 
weaves.  And  nobody  need  in  any  way  strive  for  heaven  or 
liberation.  But  such  a  position  is  neither  reasonable  nor  is  it 
accepted  by  anybody.  Therefore  this  assertion  of  something 
coming  out  of  nothing  is  unjustifiable. 


Topic  5:  Buddhist  Idealism  Refuted 

Vijnanavada  :  The  defects,  such  as  the  impossibility  of  forma¬ 
tion  of  aggregates  that  arise  against  the  views  of  those  Buddhists 
who  believe  in  external  things,  having  been  pointed  out,  the 
Vijiianavadin  (Buddhist  Idealist  believing  in  momentary  con¬ 
sciousness)  now  stands  up  in  opposition.  (He  asserts):  This 
(earlier)  viewpoint,  based  on  the  belief  that  external  things 
exist,  was  taught  (by  Buddha)  as  a  concession  to  some  of  those 
followers  who  were  noticed  to  have  a  predilection  for  external 
things.  But  that  was  not  the  view  of  Buddha  himself,  whose  real 
sanction  was  for  the  doctrine  of  the  group  constituted  by  con¬ 
sciousness  (subjective  cognition)  alone.  According  to  this 
Vijnanavada,  all  dealings  concerned  with  means  of  knowledge, 
objects  of  knowledge,  and  ends  of  knowledge  become  possible 
as  subjective  occurrences  superimposed  on  consciousness;36  for 

30  Consciousness  itself  appearing  as  the  imaginary  blue  colour  becomes 
the  perceived  object;  as  awareness  it  becomes  knowledge;  as  the  power 


II.  ii.  27  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  417 

even  though  an  external  object  may  exist,  there  can  be  no 
activity  of  the  means  of  knowledge  etc.,  unless  it  be  through  a 
superimposition  of  that  object  on  consciousness  (i.e.  unless  the 
mind  or  intellect  is  aware  of  it).  If  it  be  asked,  “How,  again, 
can  it  be  known  that  all  these  processes  are  subjective,  and  that 
nothing  but  subjective  cognition  exists”? — the  answer  he  (the 
Buddhist)  gives  is  that,  this  is  so  because  no  external  thing  can 
possibly  exist.  When  external  objects  are  assumed,  they  must 
either  be  the  individual  atoms  or  an  aggregate  of  them — a  pillar 
for  instance.  Of  these  the  knowledge  of  the  atoms  cannot  be 
acquired  through  a  perception  of  the  pillar  etc.,  for  the  atoms 
are  not  objects  of  perception.36®  And  a  pillar  etc.  cannot  be  a 
conglomeration  of  atoms,  since  the  (aggregates  like)  pillar  etc. 
cannot  be  ascertained  to  be  either  different  from  or  identical 
with  the  atoms.  Thus  also  are  to  be  rejected  genus,  (quality, 
action),  etc.  Moreover,  knowledge,  as  it  arises,  has  the  com¬ 
mon  feature  of  being  a  mere  awareness;  but  it  displays  a  selective 
bias  for  individual  forms,  such  as  the  knowledge  of  a  pillar,  the 
knowledge  of  a  wall,  the  knowledge  of  a  pot,  the  knowledge  of 
a  cloth,  and  so  on.  This  particularization  cannot  be  possible 
unless  there  be  some  peculiarity  in  each  individual  cognition 
itself.  And  so  in  this  way  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  knowledge 
has  a  tendency  to  have  the  same  form  as  its  content.  And  once 
this  is  admitted,  the  objective  appearances  become  explicable 
from  the  standpoint  of  consciousness  alone  (they  being  included 
within  the  knowledge  itself),  and  it  becomes  useless  to  assume 
external  objects.  Moreover,  from  the  fact  of  the  simultaneous 
awareness  of  the  knowledge  and  its  object,  it  follows  that  the 
object  and  its  knowledge  are  identical.  For  neither  of  them  can 
be  known  without  the  other.  This  simultaneity  would  not  have 
been  possible  if  knowledge  and  its  object  were  naturally 
different;37  for  there  would  be  nothing  to  cause  a  hindrance 

of  that  revelation  it  becomes  the  means  of  knowledge;  and  as  the 
repository  of  that  knowledge  it  becomes  the  knower. 

”*Are  not  perceived  as  possessed  of  the  qualities  of  a  pillar,  e.g.  unity, 
solidity,  etc. 

87  For  momentary  consciousness  would  not  then  be  reasonably  associated 
with  an  object  that  is  different  from  it. 

27 


418  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  II.  ii.  27 

(to  the  cognition  of  one  even  when  the  other  is  not  cognized). 
For  this  reason  also  there  is  no  external  object. 

This  is  to  be  understood  as  analogous  to  dream  etc.  Even  as 
the  cognitions  in  a  dream,  a  magic,  water  in  a  mirage,  a  phantom 
city  in  the  sky,  etc.  have  stamped  on  them  the  perceptions  of 
the  knowledge  and  the  known,  though  there  are  no  objects, 
so  also  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  perceptions  of  a  pillar 
etc.  in  the  waking  state  are  of  a  similar  nature,  for  a?  percep¬ 
tions  they  do  not  differ.  If  it  be  asked,  “Were  there  no  external 
objects  how  could  there  be  a  diversity  in  knowledge?”  then  the 
Vijnanavadin  says  that  this  is  possible  owing  to  a  diversity  of 
mental  impressions.38  For  it  is  nothing  contradictory  in  this 
beginningless  state  of  transmigration  that  cognitions  and  mental 
impressions  should  have  a  variety,  acting  as  they  do  alternately 
as  the  causes  and  effects  of  one  another  like  the  seed  and  the 
sprout.  Moreover,  it  is  known  through  a  process  of  agreement 
and  difference  (i.e.  from  positive  and  negative  instances)  that 
variety  in  knowledge  occurs  from  past  impressions;  for  by  both 
of  us  it  is  admitted  that  even  in  the  absence  of  objects,  a  variety 
in  cognition,  caused  by  past  impressions,  takes  place  in  dream 
etc.  But  it  is  not  admitted  by  me  that  even  without  such  mental 
impression,  knowledge  can  have  a  variety  in  conformity  with 
external  objects.  Hence  also  external  objects  do  not  exist. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position  we  say: 

3q?55§:  II^II 

?jNot  3 PTR:  non-existent  because  of  perception. 

28 .  (External  objects  are)  not  non-existent ,  for  they  are 
perceived. 

It  cannot  be  asserted  that  external  things  do  not  exist. 

Why? 

“Because  they  are  perceived.”  As  a  matter  of  fact  such  things 

“The  previous  knowledge  occurring  in  a  beginningless  chain  creates 
the  impression  (or  tendency).  Through  its  force,  a  variety  of  cognitions, 
in  the  form  of  blueness  etc.,  can  occur  even  after  the  interval  of  several 
moments. 


II.ii.28]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  419 

as  a  pillar,  a  wall,  a  pot,  a  cloth,  are  perceived  along  with  each 
act  of  cognition.  And  it  cannot  be  that  the  very  thing  perceived 
is  non-existent.  How  can  a  man’s  words  be  acceptable  who 
while  himself  perceiving  an  external  object  through  sense- 
contacts  still  says,  “I  do  not  perceive,  and  that  object  does  not 
exist”,  just  as  much  as  a  man  while  eating  and  himself  experienc¬ 
ing  the  satisfaction  arising  from  that  act  might  say,  “Neither  do 
I  eat,  nor  do  I  get  any  satisfaction”? 

Vijmnavadin :  Well,  I  do  not  say  that  I  do  not  perceive  any 
object,  but  all  that  I  hold  is  that  I  do  not  perceive  anything, 
apart  from  the  perception. 

Vedantin  :  Yes,  you  do  speak  like  that,  since  you  have  no 
curb  to  your  mouth;  but  you  do  not  speak  logically,  for  some¬ 
thing  other  than  the  perception  has  to  be  admitted  perforce,  just 
because  it  is  perceived.  Not  that  anybody  cognizes  a  perception 
to  be  a  pillar,  a  wall,  etc.,  rather  all  people  cognize  a  pillar,  a 
wall,  etc.  as  objects  of  perception.  And  it  is  for  this  reason  that 
all  people  understand  those  others  (viz  the  Buddhists)  as  really 
assuming  the  existence  of  an  external  thing  even  while  they 
deny  it  by  saying,  “That  which  is  the  content  of  an  internal 
awareness  appears  as  though  external”.  For  they  use  the  phrase 
“as  though”  in  the  clause  “as  though  external”  just  because  they 
too  become  aware  of  a  cognition  appearing  externally  in  the 
same  way  as  is  well  known  to  all  people,  and  yet  they  want  to 
deny  any  external  object.39  Else  why  should  they  say,  “as  though 
external”?  For  nobody  speaks  thus:  “Vi$oumitra  appears  like 
the  son  of  a  barren  woman”.  Accordingly,  those  who  accept 
truth  to  be  just  what  it  is  actually  perceived  to  be,  should 
accept  a  thing  as  it  actually  reveals  itself  externally,  and  not 
“as  though  appearing  outside”. 

Buddhist:  Since  no  object  can  possibly  exist  externally,  I 
come  to  the  conclusion  that  it  appears  as  though  it  is  outside. 

Vedantin  :  This  conclusion  is  not  honest,  since  the  possibility 
or  impossibility  of  the  existence  of  a  thing  is  determined  in 
accordance  with  the  applicability  or  non-applicability  of  the 

39  What  people  understand  from  the  Buddhist  teaching  is  that  to  the 
Buddhist  the  internal  awareness  of  an  object  appears  as  occurring  outside 
That  understanding  itself  is  a  proof  of  their  awareness  of  externality. 


420 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.ii.28 


means  of  knowledge  to  it,  but  the  applicability  or  non-appli¬ 
cability  of  the  means  of  knowledge  is  not  ascertained  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  possibility  or  impossibility  (of  the  thing).  What 
is  known  through  anyone  of  the  means  of  knowledge,  such  as 
direct  perception  etc.,  is  possible,  and  what  cannot  be  known 
through  any  one  of  these  means  of  knowledge  is  impossible.  In 
the  case  under  discussion,  the  external  things  are  known  indi¬ 
vidually  by  the  respective  means  of  knowledge;  so  how  can 
they  be  declared  to  be  impossible  by  raising  such  alternatives 
as  different,  non- different,  etc.?40  For  external  things  are  per¬ 
ceived  as  a  matter  of  fact.  It  is  wrong  to  say  that  external  things 
do  not  exist  merely  on  the  ground  that  cognition  is  seen  to  have 
the  likeness  of  an  object,  because  the  very  likeness  of  an  object 
is  not  possible  unless  the  object  itself  be  there,  and  also  because 
the  object  is  cognized  outside.  So  also  it  has  to  be  admitted  that 
the  regularity  in  the  simultaneous  appearance  of  the  cognition 
and  its  object  is  owing  to  the  relation  of  causality  between  them 
and  not  owing  to  their  identity.  Again,  in  (such  forms  of  aware¬ 
ness  as)  “knowledge  of  a  pot”,  “knowledge  of  a  cloth”,  the 
difference  is  seen  in  the  two  qualifying  parts,  pot  and  cloth,  but 
not  in  the  substantive  part  knowledge,  even  as  in  the  cases  of 
“a  white  cow”  and  “a  black  cow”  we  find  that  whiteness  and 
blackness  alone  differ,  but  not  so  the  cowhood.  And  the  differ¬ 
ence  of  the  one  (viz  cowhood)  from  the  two  (whiteness,  black¬ 
ness)  stands  out  clearly,  as  also  the  difference  of  the  two  from 
the  one.  Therefore  an  object  and  its  knowledge  differ.  Similar 
should  be  our  comprehension  in  the  cases  of  the  seeing  of  a  pot 
and  the  remembrance  of  a  pot.  Here  also  the  substantives,  viz 
seeing  and  remembering  differ,  but  not  so  the  adjectival  portion, 
viz  pot;  this  is  just  as  in  the  cases  of  the  cognitions,  “the  smell 
of  milk”,  and  “the  taste  of  milk”,  where  the  substantives  smell 
and  taste  alone  differ,  but  not  so  the  adjectival  part  milk. 

40  The  Buddhists  argue  that  external  objects  cannot  logically  exist  because 
a  pillar,  for  instance,  cannot  be  proved  to  be  either  different  or  non- 
different  from  the  atoms  constituting  it.  But  the  Buddhist  view  is  illogical; 
for  according  to  them,  consciousness  alone  exists,  and  it  is  not  gross.  So 
it  cannot  have  for  its  content  things  that  are  many  and  gross;  hence  there 
can  be  no  idea  of  external  things  according  to  their  theory. 


II.  ii.  28] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


421 


Moreover,  as  regards  two  cognitions  occurring  successively, 
which  vanish  after  self-revelation,  there  can  be  no  logical  appre¬ 
hension  of  the  one  by  the  other.  And  in  that  case  will  be  nul¬ 
lified  all  the  assertions  made  in  the  Buddhist  scriptures  them¬ 
selves  about  the  difference  among  cognitions,  momentariness  and 
other  attributes,  individual  characteristics,  common  charac¬ 
teristics,  bequeathing  of  tendency  by  one  cognition  to  the  other, 
true,  false,  or  mixed  attributes  arising  from  contact  with 
nescience,  as  also  about  bondage,  liberation,  and  so  on. 

Again,  if  one  admits  a  distinction  between  knowledge  and 
knowledge,  why  should  not  one  admit  external  objects  such  as 
a  pillar,  a  wall,  and  so  on? 

Buddhist :  A  cognition  is  actually  perceived. 

Veddntin :  External  things  too  are  perceived,  and  so  they  too 
should  be  admitted. 

Buddhist :  Since  cognition  is  a  luminous  thing  it  stands  self- 
revealed  like  a  lamp,  but  an  external  object  is  not  like  that. 

Veddntin:  Then  like  assuming  that  fire  burns  itself,  you 
assume  that  something  can  act  on  itself  by  itself,  which  is 
absolutely  opposed  to  reason;  yet  you  do  not  admit  the  well- 
known  fact,  bearing  no  contradiction,  that  an  external  object  is 
known  through  a  cognition  which  is  different  from  the  object. 
What  a  great  display  of  erudition  you  make!  It  cannot  be 
asserted  that  consciousness  is  known  to  itself  as  something  apart 
from  objects  for  the  simple  reason  that  there  can  be  no  action 
on  oneself. 

Buddhist :  If  a  cognition  has  to  be  known  by  some  entity 
other  than  itself,  that  second  one  will  have  to  be  known  by 
another,  and  that  one  again  by  another.  This  will  lead  to  an 
infinite  regress.  Moreover,  since  cognition  is  an  illuminator  like 
a  lamp,  if  you  should  imagine  a  second  cognition  (to  know  it), 
then  since  both  the  cognitions  are  similar  there  will  be  no  revela¬ 
tion  of  the  one  by  the  other,  so  that  this  whole  assumption  will 
fall  to  the  ground. 

Veddntin :  Both  these  arguments  are  wrong,  for  once  an 
awareness  of  the  cognition  occurs,  no  further  desire  to  appre¬ 
hend  the  witness  of  the  cognition  can  arise;  and  so  there  is  no 


422 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 


[II.  ii.28 


possibility  of  infinite  regress.41  And  since  the  witness  and  the 
cognition  are  different  by  nature,  there  can  be  a  relationship 
of  the  perceiver  and  the  perceived  among  them.  Besides,  the 
self-evident  witness  cannot  be  denied.42  There  is  another  consid¬ 
eration.  When  you  assert  that  cognition  shines  by  itself  like 
a  lamp  without  requiring  some  other  cognition,  you  virtually 
say  that  a  cognition  is  not  apprehended  by  any  other  means  of 
knowledge  or  by  anything  else,  which  would  be  like  saying  that 
a  thousand  lamps  shine  (unknown)  within  a  massive  boulder. 

Buddhist :  Exactly  so;  for  cognition  being  of  the  nature  of  an 
awareness  (suggested  by  you),  you  have  only  approved  the 
view  that  we  hold. 

Veddntin :  No,  for  it  is  seen  that  some  other  perceiver  having 
the  eye  etc.  as  his  instrument,  perceives  a  lamp  etc.  So  it  is 
understood  that  since  cognition  has  equally  to  be  revealed  by 
some  one  else,  it  can  be  perceived  like  a  lamp  only  when  a 
distinct  perceiver  is  present. 

Buddhist :  By  upholding  the  theory  that  the  perceiving  wit¬ 
ness  is  self-effulgent,  you  only  accept  under  a  different  garb  of 
words  my  own  view  that  cognition  shines  by  itself. 

Veddntin :  Not  so,  for  you  admit  many  such  distinctions  for 
cognition  as  origin,  destruction,  multiplicity,  and  so  on.  And 
hence  it  is  that  we  establish  the  apprehension  of  that  cognition 
by  some  entity  outside  it,  as  in  the  case  of  a  lamp. 


n^tli 


^  And  on  account  of  difference  of  nature  q*  not 

like  dream  etc. 

41  As  soon  as  a  mode  ( vrtti )  occurs  in  the  mind  as  a  result  of  contact 
between  the  senses  and  objects,  the  object  and  this  mental  cognition 
( vrtti-jnana )  become  revealed  by  the  witnessing  Self.  An  object  cannot 
reveal  itself,  it  being  inert;  the  mental  apprehension  also  cannot  reveal 
itself,  being  equally  inert.  But  when  the  existence  of  the  witness  gets 
revealed  on  that  mental  apprehension,  there  can  be  no  further  question  of 
revealing  the  witness.  This  witness  is  different  from  the  mental  cognition. 
Thus  there  is  no  infinite  regress. 

49  To  substantiate  the  difference  among  your  momentary  cognitions 
you  have  to  admit  the  witness  which  stands  aloof  to  see  this  difference. 


II.ii.29]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  423 

29.  And  because  of  the  difference  of  nature  ( the  waking  state 
is)  not  (false)  like  dream  etc . 

It  has  been  said  by  those  who  deny  the  existence  of  external 
things  that  perceptions  of  things  like  a  pillar  etc.  in  the  waking 
state  occur  even  in  the  absence  of  external  things,  just  as  they 
do  in  a  dream;  for  as  perceptions,  they  are  similar.  That  has  to 
be  refuted.  With  regard  to  this  we  say,  the  perceptions  of  the 
waking  state  cannot  be  classed  with  those  in  a  dream. 

Why? 

Because  of  difference  of  characteristics;  for  waking  and  dream 
states  are  really  different  in  nature. 

In  what  does  that  difference  consist? 

We  say  that  it  consists  in  being  subject  to  sublation  or  not. 
To  a  man,  arisen  from  sleep,  the  object  perceived  in  a  dream 
becomes  sublated,  for  he  says,  “Falsely  did  I  imagine  myself  in 
contact  with  great  men.  In  fact  I  never  came  in  contact  with 
great  men;  only  my  mind  became  overpowered  by  sleep;  and 
thus  this  delusion  arose.”  So  also  in  the  case  of  magic  etc.,  ade¬ 
quate  sublation  takes  place.  But  a  thing  seen  in  the  waking  state, 
a  pillar  for  instance,  is  not  thus  sublated  under  any  condition. 
Moreover,  dream  vision  is  a  kind  of  memory,  whereas  the  visions 
of  the  waking  state  are  forms  of  perceptions  (through  valid 
means  of  knowledge).  And  the  difference  between  perception 
and  memory,  consisting  in  the  presence  and  absence  of  objects, 
can  be  understood  by  oneself,  as  for  instance  when  one  says,  “1 
remember  my  beloved  son,  but  I  do  not  see  him,  though  I  warn 
to  see”.  That  being  so,  it  cannot  be  asserted  by  a  man,  who 
feels  the  difference  of  the  two,  that  the  perception  of  the  waking 
state  is  false,  merely  on  the  ground  that  it  is  a  perception  like 
the  perception  in  a  dream.  And  it  is  not  logical  for  those  who 
consider  themselves  intelligent  to  deny  their  own  experience. 
Moreover,  one  who  cannot  speak  of  the  waking  experiences  as 
naturally  baseless,  just  because  this  would  contradict  experience, 
wants  to  speak  of  them  as  such  on  the  strength  of  their  similarity 
with  dream  experiences.  But  anything  that  cannot  be  the 
characteristic  of  something  in  its  own  right,  cannot  certainly 


424 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  ii.  29 


be  so  because  of  a  similarity  with  another.  For  fire  which  is  felt 
to  be  warm  does  not  become  cold  because  of  some  similarity43 
with  water.  As  for  the  difference  between  dream  and  the  waking 
states,  this  has  already  been  shown. 

113011 

Not  tttc;  existence  :  because  of  non-perception. 

30.  ( Tendencies )  can  have  no  existence  since  ( according  to 
you)  external  things  are  not  perceived. 

And  the  assertion  has  to  be  refuted  that  even  in  the  absence 
of  objects,  the  diversity  of  experience  can  be  explained  on  the 
strength  of  the  variety  of  tendencies  (or  impressions).  To  this 
we  say:  The  tendencies  cannot  logically  exist;  for  according  to 
you,  objects  are  not  perceived  externally.  It  is  precisely  owing 
to  the  perception  of  objects  that  a  variety  of  (mental)  tenden¬ 
cies  corresponding  to  the  diverse  objects  can  arise.  But  how  can 
a  variety  of  tendencies  arise  when  no  object  is  perceived?  Even 
if  these  tendencies  have  no  beginning  (on  the  analogy  of  the 
seed  and  the  sprout),  this  infinite  regress  will  amount  to  a 
baseless  assumption  leading  us  nowhere  like  the  blind  leading 
the  blind,44  and  it  will  thus  cut  at  the  root  of  all  human  dealings, 
so  that  your  aim  will  remain  unfulfilled.  And  it  is  to  be  noted 
that  the  positive  and  negative  instances  that  were  adduced  by 
those  who  would  deny  the  existence  of  external  objects  by 
saying,  “All  these  experiences  are  caused  by  tendencies  and  not 
by  objects” — those  instances  also  stand  refuted  from  this  stand¬ 
point;  for  no  tendency  can  arise  unless  there  be  a  perception 
of  some  object.  Moreover,  from  the  admission  that  apprehen¬ 
sion  of  objects  is  possible  even  in  the  absence  of  past  tendencies, 

"For  instance,  both  being  “substances”. 

"The  whole  chain  of  one  tendency  creating  another  will  start  with 
the  initial  defect  of  the  first  tendency  being  created  without  an  external 
object.  Thus,  being  basically  illogical,  it  cannot  help  you  out  of  the  rut. 
The  analogy  of  the  seed-and-sprout  is  illogical;  for  both  seed  and  sprout 
are  perceived  as  causing  each  other  interminably,  both  backward  and 
forward;  but  you  do  not  admit  that  an  object  produces  a  perception. 


II.  ii.  31]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  425 

and  from  the  non-admission  that  tendencies  are  possible  in  the 
absence  of  perception  of  object,  it  follows  that  such  positive 
and  negative  instances  (adduced  by  you)  also  prove  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  objects.  Besides,  what  you  call  a  tendency  is  a  kind  of 
impression  (or  predisposition);  and  from  common  experience 
it  is  known  that  a  disposition  cannot  be  imagined  to  exist  unless 
it  has  some  basis  to  stand  on,  whereas  you  have  nothing  to 
supply  this  need;  for  nothing  can  be  found  (by  following  your 
view)  to  stand  as  an  abode  for  dispositions. 

esfofcsu  113  ?u 

^  And  flfuifrftfTd  on  account  of  momentariness. 

31.  And  (the  ego-consciousness  cannot  be  the  abode),  for  it 
is  momentary . 

As  for  the  ego-consciousness  that  is  assumed  to  be  the  abode 
of  disposition  (or  tendency),  that  too  has  no  stable  form,  since 
you  postulate  its  momentariness  like  sense-perception.  Hence  it 
cannot  be  the  abode  of  tendencies.  For  unless  there  be  some 
principle  running  through  everything  and  abiding  through  all 
the  three  periods  of  time  or  some  unchanging  witness  of  all, 
there  can  be  no  human  dealing  involving  remembrance,  recogni¬ 
tion,  etc.  which  are  contingent  on  past  impressions  that  are 
stored  up  in  conformity  with  environment,  time,  and  causation. 
If  the  ego-consciousness  be  (assumed  to  be)  unchanging  by 
nature,  your  doctrine  (of  momentariness)  will  be  set  at  naught. 
Moreover,  since  the  theory  of  momentariness  is  upheld  equally 
in  Vijnanavada,  all  the  defects  arising  from  momentariness  that 
were  levelled  (by  us)  against  the  theory  of  those  (Buddhists) 
who  believe  in  the  existence  of  (momentary)  external  things, 
viz  those  shown  under  the  aphorisms  starting  from,  “And 
because  the  earlier  is  negated  when  the  later  emerges”  (II.  ii. 
20),  are  to  be  remembered  in  this  context  as  well.  Thus  are 
refuted  both  these  Buddhist  points  of  view — of  both  those  who 
believe  in  the  external  things  and  those  who  believe  in  (subjec¬ 
tive)  consciousness.  As  for  the  view  of  the  absolute  nihilist,  no 
attempt  is  made  for  its  refutation  since  it  is  opposed  to  all  means 


426 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  ii.  31 


of  valid  knowledge.  For  human  behaviour,  conforming  as  it 
does  to  all  right  means  of  valid  knowledge,  cannot  be  denied  so 
long  as  a  different  order  of  reality  is  not  realized;  for  unless 
there  be  an  exception,  the  general  rule  prevails. 


^^srqq^sr  u^n 

^  Besides,  from  every  point  of  view  being 

untenable. 

32.  Besides  (this  view  stands  condemned ),  it  being  untenable 
from  every  point  of  view . 

To  be  brief,  from  every  point  of  view  that  this  Buddhist 
doctrine  may  be  examined  for  finding  out  some  justification,  it 
breaks  down  like  a  well  sunk  in  sand;  and  we  do  not  find  any 
the  least  logic  here.  Hence  also  all  behaviour  based  on  the 
Buddhist  scripture  is  unjustifiable.  Moreover,  Buddha  exposed 
his  own  incoherence  in  talk  when  he  instructed  the  three 
mutually  contradictory  theories  of  the  existence  of  external 
objects,  existence  of  consciousness,  and  absolute  nihilism;  or  he 
showed  his  malevolence  towards  all  creatures,  acting  under  the 
delusion  that  these  creatures  would  get  confused  by  imbibing 
contradictory  views.  The  idea  is  that  the  Buddhist  view  should 
be  abjured  in  every  way  by  all  who  desire  the  highest  good. 

Topic  6:  Jaina  View  Refuted 

113311 

Not  in  the  same  thing  owing  to  impos¬ 

sibility. 

33.  (The  Jaina  view  is)  not  right  since  the  presence  (of 
contradictory  attributes)  in  one  and  the  same  thing  is  impossible . 

The  view  of  Buddha  has  been  disproved.  Now  is  being 
invalidated  the  view  of  the  naked  ones  (Jainas).  The  categories 
approved  by  them  are  seven — called  (1)  the  soul  (experiencer), 


II.ii.33]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  427 

(2)  non-soul  (the  experienced  objects),  (3)  impulsion  (of 
sense-organs  towards  objects),  (4)  control  (of  senses  and 
organs),  (5)  austerities  (which  completely  demolish  merit  and 
demerit  through  experience  of  happiness  and  sorrow),  (6) 
bondage  (action),  (7)  liberation  (a  continuous  upward  move¬ 
ment).  In  brief,  there  are  only  two  categories — soul  and  non¬ 
soul,  for  the  others  get  included,  as  best  they  can,  in  these  two 
only.  This  is  how  they  think.  They  speak  of  these  two  in  another 
way  thus:  There  are  five  categories  called  asti-kayas — the 
category  of  soul,  the  category  of  body  (combination  of  atoms), 
the  category  of  merit,  the  category  of  demerit,  and  the  category 
of  space  (want  of  hindrance).  They  describe  many  subsidiary 
divisions  of  each  one  of  these  according  to  the  assumptions  of 
their  own  doctrine.  And  in  all  cases  they  apply  this  logic  of 
what  they  call  the  logic  with  seven  facets:  (1)  somehow  (may 
be  it)  exists,  (2)  somehow  (may  be  it)  does  not  exist,  (3)  some¬ 
how  exists  and  does  not  exist,  (4)  somehow  indescribable,  (5) 
somehow  exists  and  is  indescribable,  (6)  somehow  does  not  exist 
and  is  indescribable,  (7)  somehow  exists,  does  not  exist,  and  is 
indescribable.  Thus  they  apply  this  logic  with  seven  facets 
(sapta-bhangi-naya)  to  unity  and  permanence  as  well.45 

With  regard  to  this  we  say:  This  assumption  is  not  justifiable. 

Why? 

“Owing  to  the  impossibility  of  presence  in  one  and  the  same 
thing”;  for  it  is  not  possible  for  such  contradictory  character¬ 
istics  as  existence,  non-existence,  and  so  on  to  be  associated 
simultaneously  with  the  same  thing;  just  as  much  as  cold  and 
heat  cannot  be.  These  seven  categories  that  are  definitely  ascer¬ 
tained  to  be  so  many  in  number  and  such  in  character,  must 
either  be  just  as  they  are  described  or  they  must  not;  for  else 
the  resulting  knowledge  of  such  an  indefinite  nature,  which  may 


48  Unity  and  permanence  somehow  may  exist,  may  not  exist,  may  both 
exist  and  not  exist,  and  so  on.  When  the  intention  is  to  speak  of  a  thing 
as  successively  existing  and  non-existing,  they  use  the  third  mood.  But 
when  the  intention  is  to  speak  of  existence  and  non-existence  simul¬ 
taneously,  the  two  states  being  inexpressible  at  the  same  time,  they  call  it 
indescribable. 


428  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  33 

either  be  as  it  is  described  or  may  not  be  so,  will  certainly  be 
unauthoritative  like  doubts.46 

Jaina :  When  knowledge  of  a  definite  nature,  viz  that  a  thing 
has  different  facets,  does  arise,  it  cannot  be  invalid  like  doubts. 

Vedantin  :  We  say,  no;  for  one  who  would  unrestrictedly 
affirm  indefiniteness  for  every  object  without  exception,  the 
definiteness  of  his  knowledge  itself  being  equally  an  object  of 
knowledge,  would  come  under  the  application  of  such  alterna¬ 
tives  as,  “somehow  it  may  exist,  somehow  it  may  not  exist”,  and 
so  on;  and  hence  this  knowledge  would  have  an  indefinite  nature 
all  the  same.  Similarly,  the  ascertainer,  as  also  the  knowledge 
that  results  from  the  ascertainment,  would  be  somehow  partially 
existent  and  somehow  partially  non-existent.  This  being  so,  how 
can  a  teacher  of  the  Jaina  school,  (who  has  to  be  assumed  to 
be)  an  authority,  impart  instruction  when  the  means  of  know¬ 
ledge,  objects  of  knowledge,  the  knower,  and  knowledge  remain 
indefinite  in  nature? 

Also  how  can  those  who  rely  on  his  views  act  upon  his  in¬ 
struction  about  things  which  remain  indefinite  in  their  nature? 
For  all  people  engage  without  hesitation  in  the  requisite  practices 
for  acquiring  some  result  when  that  has  been  ascertained  to  be 
inevitable,  but  not  otherwise.  For  this  reason  also,  if  anyone 
should  write  a  scripture  of  such  indefinite  significance,  his  words 
will  be  unacceptable  like  those  of  the  mad  or  intoxicated.  So  also 
when  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  categories  mentioned  as 
five  in  number  (viz  soul,  non-soul,  etc.),  have  really  that  number 
or  not,  the  conclusion  from  one  point  of  view  will  be  that  the 
number  is  five,  and  from  another  point  of  view  that  it  is  not  so; 
and  hence  those  things  can  be  greater  or  less  in  number.  Besides, 
these  categories  cannot  be  indescribable  (that  is  to  say,  existing 
and  non-existing  at  the  same  time);  for  if  they  be  indescribable, 
they  cannot  be  expressed  in  words.  It  involves  a  contradic¬ 
tor  the  soul  etc.  are  averred  these  seven  alternative  moods  as  also 
their  own  characteristics  of  being  the  soul  etc.  Now,  are  these  “existence” 
and  “non-existence”  constant  or  are  they  spasmodic?  In  the  first  case, 
the  position  is  untenable,  since  it  contradicts  such  perceptions  as,  “This 
pot  does  exist”.  In  the  second  case,  there  can  be  no  definite  knowledge  of 
anything. 


n.ii.  34] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


429 


tion  to  utter  them  in  words  and  yet  to  hold  that  they  are 
indescribable.  Again,  even  when  they  are  expressed  in  words, 
they  may  either  be  understood  as  such  or  may  not  be  under¬ 
stood.  Similarly  the  perfect  knowledge,  arising  from  the  com¬ 
prehension  of  all  this,  may  exist  or  may  not;  so  also  its 
opposite,  false  knowledge,  may  or  may  not  exist.  Anyone 
who  would  speak  in  that  way,  would  be  classed  with  the 
intoxicated  and  the  mad,  but  not  with  people  whose  words 
can  be  trusted.  Moreover,  no  reasonable  inspiration  for  action 
to  achieve  liberation  or  heaven  will  follow  from  an  indefinite 
knowledge  that  heaven  and  liberation  exist  on  the  one  hand 
and  do  not  exist  on  the  other;  or  similarly  that  they  are  eternal 
from  one  point  of  view  and  impermanent  from  another.  And  the 
eternally  free  souls  (Arhats)  and  the  rest  (who  either  become  free 
through  spiritual  practices  or  continue  in  bondage),  whose 
natures  have  been  determined  to  be  so  in  their  own  (Jaina) 
books,  will  tend  to  have  an  indefinite  nature.  Thus  since  it  is 
not  possible  for  any  of  the  categories,  counting  from  the  souls, 
to  have  such  contradictory  attributes  as  existence  and  non¬ 
existence,  and  since  in  the  presence  of  the  attribute  of  existence 
there  can  be  no  possibility  of  the  presence  of  the  other  attribute 
of  non-existence,  just  as  much  as  existence  is  not  possible  in  the 
presence  of  non-existence,  therefore  this  Jaina  doctrine  is  illogi¬ 
cal.  Hereby  it  is  to  be  understood  that  all  such  tenets  of  indeter¬ 
minateness,  to  the  effect  that  the  very  same  thing  is  one  and 
many,  permanent  and  impermanent,  different  and  non-different 
at  the  same  time,  that  are  assumed  by  them,  are  demolished  as 
well.  As  for  their  imagination  that  the  aggregation,  called 
pud  gala  (body)  can  result  from  the  combination  of  atoms,  that 
stands  discredited  as  a  result  of  the  earlier  refutation  of  the 
Vaise§ika  theory  of  atoms.  Hence  no  separate  attempt  is  made 
for  overthrowing  it. 


tr Similarly  also  non-pervasiveness  of  the 

soul. 


430  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.ii.34 

14.  Similarly  also  (arises  the  defect  of)  the  soul  having  no 
all-pervasiveness  (or  having  only  a  medium  dimension ).47 

Just  as  the  defect  consisting  in  the  impossibility  of  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  contradictory  attributes  in  the  same  substratum  arises 
in  the  Jaina  view,  so  also  arises  the  other  defect  of  the  embodied 
soul  becoming  limited  (or  of  a  medium  dimension). 

How? 

The  Jainas  think  that  the  embodied  soul  has  the  dimension  of 
the  body.  Now  if  it  conforms  to  the  size  of  the  body,  then  the 
soul  will  be  of  a  medium  dimension — non-omnipotent  and 
limited;  and  so  like  the  pot  etc.  the  soul  will  be  subject  to 
impermanence.  Again,  because  the  bodies  have  no  fixed  dimen¬ 
sions,  the  soul  born  as  a  man  will  assume  the  size  of  a  human 
body.  Then  when  as  the  result  of  the  fruition  of  some  past 
action  it  is  born  as  an  elephant,  it  will  not  pervade  the  whole  of 
the  elephant  body,  and  when  it  is  born  as  an  ant,  it  will  not  be 
wholly  contained  in  the  body  of  the  ant.  This  defect  applies 
equally  to  the  different  stages  of  boyhood,  youth,  and  old  age 
during  the  same  life. 

It  may  be  held  that  the  soul  has  infinite  parts;  these  parts  get 
condensed  in  a  small  body  and  expanded  in  a  large  one.  But  then 
it  has  to  be  stated  as  to  whether  there  is  any  obstruction  to  the 
different  parts  of  the  soul  becoming  concentrated  at  the  same 
place  or  not.  Should  there  be  any  impediment,  the  infinite  parts 
will  not  be  contained  in  the  same  limited  space;  and  even  if 
there  be  no  impediment,  then  all  the  parts  can  very  well  be 
accommodated  in  the  place  occupied  by  a  single  part,  so  that 
there  will  be  no  possibility  of  increase  in  magnitude.  As  a  result, 
the  predicament  will  arise  of  the  embodied  soul  becoming  atomic 
in  dimension.  Besides,  it  cannot  even  be  imagined  that  the  soul 
that  is  limited  by  the  size  of  the  body  should  have  infinite  parts. 

Again,  if  it  be  argued  that  whenever  in  due  sequence  the  soul 
gets  a  large  body,  it  has  an  accretion  of  some  parts,  and  when- 


47  Ratnaprabha  has  “Akartsnyam-MadhyaTm-parimdnatvam”;  Bhamati  has, 
“ Akrtsnatvani-paricchinnatvam ”.  Madhyama-parimana  is  a  dimension 
changing  according  to  the  body;  and  paricchinna  means  limited. 


II.  ii.  35]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  431 

ever  it  gets  a  small  body  it  has  a  reduction  of  some  parts,  then 
the  answer  is: 


*  *t 


fa+uifew  113*11 


^  And  ^  not  srfq-  even  qir^RT  from  (assumption  of)  sequence 
contradiction  can  be  avoided,  f%37R-3TTfcwr:  in  the  face 
of  mutability  etc. 


35 .  And  the  contradiction  carmot  be  avoided  even  by  an 
assumption  of  sequence  (in  the  increase  and  decrease  of  parts), 
for  still  there  will  be  the  defects  of  mutability  etc . 

Even  by  assuming  the  increase  and  decrease  of  parts  in  suc¬ 
cession  it  is  not  possible  to  establish  beyond  any  contradiction 
the  fact  that  the  soul  conforms  to  the  size  of  the  body. 

Why? 

For  this  will  lead  to  the  defects  of  changefulness  etc.  for  the 
soul.  In  the  first  instance,  mutability  becomes  unavoidable  for 
the  soul  that  increases  and  decreases  for  ever  through  the  acces¬ 
sion  and  depletion  of  parts.  And  if  it  be  mutable  like  a  piece  of 
leather,  it  will  be  subject  to  impermanence.  In  that  case  will  be 
falsified  the  assumptions  about  bondage  and  liberation,  which 
facts  are  expressed  by  saying  that  the  soul,  surrounded  by  eight 
kinds  of  karma ,48  remains  sunk  in  the  sea  of  this  world  like  a 
bottle  gourd,  and  it  floats  upward  when  that  bond  is  snapped. 
Moreover,  the  parts  that  come  and  go  will  be  other  than  the 
soul  precisely  because  they  are  adventitious  like  the  bodies  etc. 
In  that  case  some  part  that  is  everlasting  will  be  the  soul.  But 

“Covering  knowledge,  covering  vision,  deluding,  and  screening — which 
four  are  called  ghdti-karma.  These  are  explained  thus:  (1)  belief  that 
liberation  does  not  follow  from  knowledge  of  reality,  (2)  belief  that 
liberation  does  not  follow  from  the  hearing  of  the  Jaina  tenets  (3)  not 
finding  any  speciality  about  the  path  shown  by  the  Jaina  teachers,  (4) 
hindering  the  progress  in  the  path  of  liberation.  Aghdd-karmas  are:  (1) 
vedaniyani — belief  that  I  have  to  know  the  reality,  (2)  namikam — belief 
that  I  have  such  a  name,  (3)  gotrikatn — the  idea  that  I  have  entered  into 
the  rank  of  your  disciples,  (4)  aynskam — work  done  for  the  maintenance 
of  the  body,  or  it  means  the  body  made  of  blood  and  semen.  Gotrika  may 
also  mean — making  this  body  fit  for  the  realization  of  truth. 


432 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.ii.35 


that  cannot  be  pin-pointed  to  be  so  and  so.  Again,  it  has  to  be 
stated  from  where  these  incoming  parts  emerge  and  where  the 
outgoing  ones  submerge.  It  cannot  be  that  they  come  out  of 
the  elements  and  merge  into  the  elements;  for  the  soul  (of 
which  they  are  the  parts)  is  not  material.  And  nothing  else 
can  be  ascertained  as  either  the  common  or  uncommon  source 
of  (any  one  or  all)  the  parts  of  the  (individual)  soul;  for  that 
lacks  evidence.  Furthermore,  in  such  a  case,  the  nature  of  the 
soul  will  remain  indeterminate;  for  the  incoming  and  outgoing 
parts  will  have  no  definite  measurement.  Thus  owing  to  the 
predicament  of  such  defects,  it  is  not  possible  to  take  shelter 
under  a  successive  increase  or  decrease  in  the  parts  of  the  soul. 

Or  the  explanation  will  be  this:  Under  the  previous  aphorism 
the  doubt  raised  was  that,  if  the  soul  be  of  the  size  of  the  body, 
the  soul  will  be  subject  to  limitation  (or  incompleteness)  owing 
to  its  assumption  of  other  enlarged  or  attenuated  bodies,  and 
thus  it  will  not  be  eternal.  In  reply  to  that  doubt  it  may  be 
held  (by  the  Jainas)  that  though  the  size  of  the  soul  has  no 
fixity,  owing  to  successive  changes,  still  the  soul  can  have 
permanence  on  the  analogy  of  a  current  of  a  river.  Just  as  the 
russet-robed  (Buddhists)  hold  that  though  cognitions  have  no 
permanence,  yet  a  current  of  these  cognitions  can  well  be 
permanent,  similar  may  be  the  position  of  the  naked  ones 
(Jainas)  as  well.  This  was  the  opposite  point  of  view  presented 
under  the  earlier  aphorism.  The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin )  to 
that  is  being  given  under  the  present  one:  As  to  that,  if  the 
current  be  false,  you  will  land  into  a  theory  of  the  non-existence 
of  the  soul.  Or  if  it  be  true,  the  soul  will  be  subject  to  such 
defects  as  mutability.  Hence  this  view  is  unjustifiable. 


^  And  :  on  account  of  the  permanence  of  the 

ultimate  size,  since  both  the  (other)  sizes  become 

permanent  arfw^T:  distinction  ceases  to  exist. 

36.  The  ultimate  size  attainable  (by  the  soul)  being  perma¬ 
nent,  the  other  two  sizes  also  must  be  so;  and  hence  there  will 
be  no  distinction  (among  the  sizes). 


433 


II.  ii.  37]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 

Besides,  the  Jainas  hold  that  the  ultimate  size  attained  by  a 
soul  on  the  eve  of  liberation  becomes  permanent.  Just  like  that, 
the  earlier  initial  size  and  the  intervening  size  of  the  soul  can 
also  be  permanent,  and  hence  there  will  be  similarity  (among 
the  magnitudes).  Thus  the  soul  will  have  the  size  of  one  single 
body  only  and  it  will  not  acquire  any  other  inflated  or  deflated 
body.49 

Or  the  explanation  is  this:  Since  the  ultimate  size  of  the  soul 
is  permanent,  its  sizes  in  the  two  earlier  stages  also  must  be  the 
same.  In  that  case  the  soul  has  to  be  admitted  to  be  atomic  or 
non-atomic  at  all  times  equally.  Thus  the  Jaina  view  is  as  illogi¬ 
cal  as  the  Buddhist  view;  and  hence  it  is  to  be  ignored. 

Topic  7:  God  is  not  a  mere  Superintendent 

Now  is  being  refuted  the  theory  that  God  is  a  mere  superin¬ 
tending  cause  (and  not  a  material  cause  as  well). 

How  can  this  be  understood? 

Because  by  the  teacher  (Vyasa)  himself  God  has  been  estab¬ 
lished  as  both  the  material  and  efficient  causes  in  the  aphorism, 
“And  Brahman  must  be  the  material  as  well,  so  as  not  to 
contradict  the  declaration  and  the  illustration”  (I.  iv.  23),  as 
also  in,  “This  is  also  understood  from  the  teaching  about  the 
will  to  create”  (I.  iv.  24).  If  it  be  maintained  now  that  God’s 
causality  in  general  is  being  refuted  here,  then  from  a  contra¬ 
diction  between  the  earlier  and  later  portions,  the  objection 
would  be  raised  that  the  aphorist  stultifies  himself.  Therefore, 
what  is  being  diligently  rebutted  here  is  the  view  that  “God  is 
not  the  material  cause,  but  is  simply  the  efficient  cause,”  because 
it  runs  counter  to  the  Vedantic  conclusion  that  Brahman  is  one 
without  a  second.  This  un-Vedic  conception  takes  various  forms. 
Some,  following  the  Samkhya  and  Yoga  tenets,  conclude  that 
God,  who  is  the  ruler  of  Prakrti  and  purusa  (Nature  and  soul), 
is  merely  an  efficient  cause,  and  that  God,  Nature,  and  soul  are 

"In  order  that  there  may  be  no  incompatibility  among  the  three  sizes, 
the  earlier  bodies  must  have  the  same  size  as  the  ultimate  one,  for  if  the 
bodies  differ  in  size,  the  soul’s  conformity  to  them  will  be  impossible,  as 
already  shown. 

28 


434  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  37 

totally  different  from  one  another.  The  Mahesvaras  (Saivas  and 
others),  however,  think  that  the  five  categories — effect  (i.e. 
mahat,  ahmhkara ,  etc.),  cause  (i.e.  Nature  and  God),  union 
( samadhi ),  observances  (e.g.  bathing  three  times  a  day  etc.), 
and  the  end  of  sorrow  (liberation) — have  been  taught  by  the 
Lord  Siva  for  the  removal  of  bondage  (pdsa)  of  the  creatures 
( pasus ).  Pasupati  (Lord  of  the  creatures)  is  God,  and  He  is  the 
efficient  cause.  This  is  how  they  propound  it.  Similarly  there  are 
some  Vaise$ikas  and  others  who  speak  of  God  as  the  efficient 
cause  by  somehow  keeping  within  their  own  sphere  of  thought. 
Hence  the  answer  is  being  given  in  the  aphorism: 


ii^ii 

For  the  Lord  (there  can  be  no  creatorship) 
on  account  of  incongruity. 

31.  For  the  Lord  there  can  be  no  creatorship ,  -for  that  leads  to 
incongruity. 

“For  the  Lord”,  that  is  to  say,  for  God,  there  can  be  no 
causality  towards  the  universe  by  becoming  (a  mere)  superin¬ 
tendent  over  Nature  and  souls. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  incongruity.” 

What  is  that  incongruity? 

For  a  Lord  who  creates  the  various  creatures  by  dividing 
them  into  grades  of  inferiority,  mediocrity,  and  superiority  will 
be  open  like  ourselves  to  the  charges  of  likes,  dislikes,  etc.,  so 
that  He  will  cease  to  be  God. 

Opponent :  That  defect  will  not  arise,  for  He  acts  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  the  past  actions  of  the  creatures. 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  if  such  God  and  actions  be  mutually 
the  impeller  and  the  impelled,  it  will  lead  to  a  logical  seesaw 
(or  argument  in  a  circle,  each  being  prompted  by  the  other). 

Opponent :  This  fault  will  not  arise,  since  creation  is  without 
beginning. 

Vedantin  :  No,  just  as  at  present,  so  also  in  the  past  that  defect 


II.  ii.  38]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  435 

of  arguing  in  a  circle  is  equally  present;50  so  that  we  are  faced 
with  the  logic  of  the  blind  leading  the  blind  (for  both  action 
and  God  are  impelled,  there  being  no  impeller).  Moreover,  it  is 
the  accepted  view  of  the  logicians  that  by  noticing  an  impulsion 
to  work  it  can  be  inferred  that  there  are  such  defects  (i.e. 
likes,  dislikes,  delusion,  etc.) — ( Nyaya-sutra ,  I.  i.  18).  For 
nobody  is  seen  to  engage  in  any  work  for  one’s  own  or  for 
somebody  else’s  sake  unless  one  is  impelled  by  these  defects.  As 
a  rule,  all  people  serve  other  people’s  purposes  only  when  they 
are  impelled  by  their  own  interest.  In  this  way  also  this  is 
incongruous;  for  God  will  cease  to  be  God  by  being  selfish.  The 
incongruity  arises  even  from  the  admission  that  God  is  a  special 
type  of  puru$a  (soul),  for  that  purufa  is  admitted  to  be  indif¬ 
ferent  to  everything. 


ii^ii 

^  And  RT^’-spJ'TW:  owing  to  impossibility  of  relationship. 

38.  And  (the  incongruity  arises)  because  of  the  impossibility 
of  a  relationship. 

There  is  still  another  incongruity.  God  who  is  different  from 
Nature  and  soul  cannot  rule  them  unless  it  be  through  some 
relationship.  But  the  relationship  of  conjunction  is  not  possible, 
since  God,  Nature,  and  souls  are  all  omnipresent  and  partless. 
Nor  can  it  be  the  relationship  of  inherence,  because  of  the 
impossibility  of  determining  which  is  the  container  and  which 
the  thing  contained.  Nor  can  any  other  relationship  be  inferred 
from  the  presence  of  the  effect,  since  that  very  causal  relation¬ 
ship  has  yet  to  be  established.51 

“The  Vedantins  also  adopt  this  logic  of  the  beginninglessness  of  the 
world  for  escaping  out  of  the  defect  of  a  logical  seesaw  (B.  S.  II.  i.  34). 
But  to  them  the  world  is  unreal,  and  their  argument  amounts  to  showing 
that  everything  is  indescribable.  Everything  is  within  Maya — God,  crea¬ 
tion,  creatures,  and  all.  Others  say,  they  are  true  (See  p.  436  top). 

61  It  has  not  been  proved  so  far  that  the  universe  is  a  creation  of  Prakrti 
(Nature)  under  the  promptings  of  God.  So  the  relationship  of  God  with 
Nature  cannot  be  proved  from  the  existence  of  creation. 


436  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [H.ii.38 

Opponent :  How  does  the  believer  in  Brahman  solve  this 
problem?62 

Vedantin :  He  has  no  difficulty;  for  in  his  case  an  indescrib¬ 
able  relationship  of  identity  (between  God  and  Maya)  is 
reasonably  sustainable  (§v.  I.  3).  Moreover,  a  believer  in 
Brahman  ascertains  the  cause  etc.  in  accordance  with  the  Vedas, 
and  so  for  him  there  is  no  such  need  that  he  must  accept  all 
things  just  as  they  are  perceived.  But  the  opponent,  who  deter¬ 
mines  the  nature  of  the  cause  etc.  on  the  strength  of  illustra¬ 
tions,  has  to  accept  things  just  as  they  are  perceived.  Here  lies 
the  excellence. 

Objection :  Your  opponent  too  can  have  the  scriptures  com¬ 
posed  by  omniscient  teachers;  as  such  both  of  you  are  equally 
backed  by  scriptural  authority. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  that  will  lead  to  arguing  in  a  circle,  omnis¬ 
cience  being  proved  from  the  knowledge  of  the  authority  of 
the  scriptures  and  the  (authority  of  the)  scriptures  being  proved 
from  the  knowledge  of  the  omniscience  of  the  author.  There¬ 
fore  the  ideas  about  God  held  by  the  Samkhyas  and  Yogins  are 
illogical.  This  charge  of  incongruity  can  be  equally  levelled  in  a 
suitable  manner  against  all  other  theories  that  are  outside  the 
Vedic  pale. 

afattHl’iM'Wsr  IIHII 

^  And  because  of  the  impossibility  of  being 

directed. 

39.  And  (the  position  is  untenable )  because  of  the  impossi¬ 
bility  of  (Nature)  coming  under  (His)  direction. 

For  this  additional  reason  the  God  imagined  by  the  sophists 
has  no  justification.  Were  God  just  what  He  is  imagined  to  be, 
He  could  impel  Nature  (Pradhana)  etc.  by  becoming  their 
director  (i.e.  moulder)  in  the  same  way  as  a  potter  is  in  the  case 
of  clay  etc.  But  this  cannot  be  proved;  for  Nature,  which  is 


69  Your  Maya  and  Brahman  also  are  both  pervasive  and  partless,  and 
you  do  not  admit  inherence  as  a  relationship. 


II.  ii.  39] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


437 


beyond  the  range  of  perception  etc.  and  is  devoid  of  form  etc., 
cannot  come  under  God’s  direction  (i.e.  moulding),  it  being 
different  from  clay  etc. 

+<uict^  ?ftoTfcwr:  nvoii 

Like  (presiding  over)  the  organs  if  this  be  the 
contention,  q-  not  so  tffr-aTlIVwT:  on  account  of  (resulting) 
experiences  etc. 

40.  Should  it  be  argued  that  God  'will  direct  Nature  like  (a 
man  directing)  the  organs ,  then  it  cannot  be  soy  for  that  will 
result  in  God’s  having  experiences  (of  happiness ,  sorrow  etc.). 

Opponent :  It  may  be  thus.  Just  as  the  individual  soul  directs 
the  senses,  counting  from  the  eye,  which  cannot  be  perceived 
and  which  are  without  forms  etc.,  so  also  God  can  direct 
Nature. 

Vedantin :  Even  thus  it  is  not  possible  to  maintain  this.  It  is 
by  noticing  such  facts  as  the  experiencing  (of  happiness  and 
sorrow)  that  one  is  led  to  infer  that  the  set  of  sense-organs  has  a 
director.  But  in  this  case,  such  experience  etc.  (accruing  to 
God  from  Nature)  are  not  in  evidence.  And  if  Nature  etc.  be 
equated  with  the  set  of  sense-organs,  then  God  will  have  the 
same  kind  of  experiences  as  the  transmigrating  souls. 

Or  the  two  aphorisms  can  be  explained  in  another  way: 


39.  And  (God  cannot  be  proved),  since  no  physical  support 
(adbifthana)  is  possible  for  Him. 

For  this  further  reason,  God  as  He  is  conceived  by  the 
sophists  has  no  logical  justification.  In  this  world,  a  king,  having 
the  support  of  a  body,  is  seen  to  rule  over  a  kingdom,  but  not 
so  without  a  physical  support.  Therefore,  if  anyone  wants  to 
fancy  an  unseen  God  by  drawing  upon  that  analogy,  one  will 
have  to  imagine  some  body  as  the  seat  of  the  sense-organs  of 
God.  But  such  a  conception  is  impossible,  since  a  body  comes 


438  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  ii.  39 

into  being  after  creation  starts;  it  is  not  possible  before  creation. 
And  if  God  has  no  physical  support,  He  cannot  be  a  director. 
For  this  is  what  accords  with  experience. 

uvoii 


40.  If  a  body ,  equipped  with  sense-organs,  be  assumed  for 
God ,  (we  say  that)  this  is  not  possible;  because  of  (conse¬ 
quent)  experiences  etc. 

Again,  if  in  accordance  with  common  experience,  it  be 
fancied  that  God  can  have  a  body  to  hold  His  organs,  even  then 
His  ordainership  will  not  be  logically  sustainable;  for  if  God  has 
a  body,  He  will  have  to  undergo  experiences  like  any  trans¬ 
migrating  soul,  so  that  we  shall  be  faced  with  the  predicament 
of  God  Himself  being  deprived  of  His  Godhead. 


3T  HV?II 


Finitude  or  absence  of  omniscience. 


41.  God  will  be  subject  to  finitude  or  loss  of  omniscience. 

For  this  additional  reason,  the  God,  as  conceived  by  the 
logicians,  is  an  impossibility.  For  by  them  He  is  declared  to  be 
omniscient  as  well  as  infinite.  So  also  are  admitted  by  them  an 
infinite  Nature  and  infinite  souls  which  are  different  from  one 
another.  Now,  that  being  the  case,  the  question  is:  Can  the  limits 
(in  number  and  extension)  of  Nature,  souls,  and  Himself  be 
determined  by  God  or  not?  Eather  standpoint  is  open  to  defect. 

How? 

According  to  the  first  view,  Nature,  souls,  and  God  will 
inevitably  come  to  an  end,  since  their  limits  in  number  or  exten¬ 
sion  are  grasped  by  God.  For  this  accords  with  human  experi¬ 
ence,  according  to  which  whatever  in  this  world  has  any  limita¬ 
tion  in  number  or  dimension  has  an  end,  for  instance  a  pot. 
Similarly,  Nature,  souls,  and  God,  all  three  being  circumscribed 
in  number  or  dimension,  must  have  an  end.  As  for  a  limitation 
in  number,  that  arises  from  the  enumeration  of  Nature,  souls, 
and  God  as  three  entities.  And  their  characteristic  of  dimensions, 


II.ii.42] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


439 


as  also  the  vast  number  associated  with  the  souls,  may  well  be 
determined  by  God.  From  this  the  conclusion  arises  that  the 
world  as  well  as  the  state  of  transmigration  will  have  an  end 
for  those  transmigrating  souls  which  become  freed  from  this 
world  from  among  these  numerically  and  physically  limited 
souls.  Thus  also  when  other  souls  become  free  in  succession, 
the  transmigratory  existence  itself,  as  also  those  who  are  in  that 
state  of  existence,  will  come  to  an  end.  According  to  them,  it 
is  Nature  together  with  her  derivatives,  acting  under  the  direc¬ 
tion  of  God,  that  constitutes  the  state  of  transmigration  for 
providing  experiences  to  the  souls.  Now  in  the  absence  of  that 
as  well,  over  what  will  God  assume  His  directorship,  and  Divine 
power?  If  Nature,  soul  and  God  have  an  end  in  this  way,  they 
will  have  a  beginning  as  well.  When  they  have  both  beginning 
and  end,  we  shall  be  landed  into  nihilism.  Again,  if  for  avoiding 
this  defect,  they  stick  to  the  other  alternative  that  the  number 
and  extension  of  Nature,  souls,  and  God  are  not  determinable 
by  God,  then  this  will  lead  to  the  other  defect  that  God  will 
lose  His  omniscience.  For  this  reason  also  the  theory  of  the 
causality  of  God,  as  it  is  advocated  by  the  sophists,  is  illogical. 


Topic  8:  Bhagavata  View  Refuted 


IIVRII 

Owing  to  the  impossibility  of  origin. 

42.  (The  Bhagavata  view  that  Sa?hkar$ana  and  others  originate 
successively  from  Vasudeva  and  others  is  wrong),  since  any 
origin  (for  the  soul)  is  impossible . 

Wc  have  refuted  the  view  of  those  who  hold  that  God  is 
simply  a  directing,  efficient  cause  without  being  the  material 
cause  as  well.  Now  is  being  discarded  the  view  of  those  who 
hold  that  God  is  both  the  material  and  efficient  causes. 

Opponent :  Was  not  Brahman  ascertained  to  be  both  the 
material  and  efficient  causes  exactly  like  this  with  the  help  of 


440  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  ii.  42 

Vedic  texts  (B.  S.  I.  iv.  23)?  And  it  is  the  accepted  principle 
that  a  Smfti  is  authoritative  when  it  follows  the  Vedic  texts.  So 
what  is  the  reason  for  this  attempt  at  disproving  this  (Bhagavata) 
view? 

Vedantin :  To  this  we  say:  Although  a  portion  of  this  kind  is 
common  to  both  of  us  and  should  not  be  a  matter  of  dispute, 
there  is  another  portion  which  leads  to  disagreement.  Hence 
this  endeavour  at  rebutting  it. 

With  regard  to  this  the  Bhdgavatas  think:  God  as  Vasudeva, 
who  is  pure  consciousness  by  nature,  is  the  supreme  reality.  He 
has  divided  Himself  and  set  Himself  up  as  a  fourfold  figure — in 
the  form  of  Vasudeva,  in  the  form  of  Samkar^aija,  in  the  form 
of  Pradyumna,  and  in  the  form  of  Aniruddha.  The  supreme  Self 
is  referred  to  by  the  name  Vasudeva,  the  embodied  soul  is 
pointed  out  by  the  term  Samkar^aija,  mind  has  the  epithet  of 
Pradyumna,  and  egoism  is  called  Aniruddha.  Of  them  Vasudeva 
is  the  highest  material  cause,  while  Samkarsaija  and  others  are 
His  products.  By  adoring  Him  for  a  hundred  years  through  such 
a  process  as  visiting  Him  in  His  temples  (in  a  proper  state  of 
body,  mind,  and  speech),  acquiring  the  requisites  for  worship, 
worship,  japa  (constant  recital)  of  His  mantra ,  and  meditation, 
one  becomes  freed  from  such  drawbacks  (as  likes  and  dislikes), 
and  then  one  attains  the  Lord  Himself. 

Vedantin :  Now,  we  do  not  refute  the  view  stated  therein 
that  Narayaoa,  who  is  superior  to  Nature  and  is  well  known  to 
be  the  supreme  Self  and  the  Self  of  all,  has  divided  Himself  by 
Himself  into  many  forms;  for  from  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “He 
assumes  one  form,  He  assumes  three  forms”  (Ch.  VII.  xxvi.  2) 
etc.,  it  is  known  that  the  supreme  Self  does  become  multifarious. 
As  for  the  predilection  for  His  propitiation,*  consisting  in  visit¬ 
ing  His  temple  etc.  and  so  on,  with  exclusive  devotion  and  for 
long,  that  also  is  not  denied.  For  the  contemplation  of  God  is 
well  in  evidence  in  the  Vedas  and  Smrtis.  But  with  regard  to 
the  view  that  Samkar$ana  originates  from  Vasudeva,  Pradyumna 
from  Samkar$aQa,  and  Aniruddha  from  Pradyumna,  we  say  that 
it  is  not  possible  for  an  individual  soul,  called  Sariikar$aija,  to  be 
created  from  the  supreme  Self,  called  Vasudeva;  for  such  a  view 
will  lead  to  such  defects  as  impermanence.  If  the  individual  soul 


n.ii.44] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


441 


has  any  origin,  it  will  be  subject  to  such  defects  as  being  imper¬ 
manent  and  so  on.  Owing  to  this  drawback,  liberation,  consist¬ 
ing  in  attaining  God,  will  not  be  possible  for  the  soul,  for  an 
effect  gets  completely  destroyed  on  reaching  back  to  its  source. 
The  teacher  (Vyasa)  will  deny  any  origin  for  the  individual 
soul  in  the  aphorism,  “The  individual  soul  has  no  origin,  because 
the  Vedic  texts  do  not  mention  this  and  because  the  soul  is 
known  from  them  to  be  eternal”  (II.  iii.  17).  Accordingly  this 
assumption  is  unjustifiable. 


*  ^  sflcf :  TWJ  IIV^il 

^  And  rf  not  from  an  agent  (originates)  an 

implement. 

43.  And  (this  view  is  wrong  because)  an  implement  cannot 
originate  from  its  agent  (who  wields  it). 

That  (Bhagavata)  assumption  is  wrong  for  this  additional 
reason  that  in  the  world  it  is  never  seen  that  such  implements 
as  an  axe  etc.  originate  from  the  agent  of  the  action  (of  cutting 
etc.),  say  for  instance  Devadatta.  But  the  Bhagavatas  describe 
this  thus:  From  the  individual  soul,  called  Samkar§aija,  who  is 
the  agent,  originates  the  instrument  mind,  called  Pradyumna; 
and  from  the  mind,  originating  from  the  agent,  emerges  egoism, 
called  Aniruddha.  We  cannot,  however,  comprehend  this  in  the 
absence  of  any  confirming  parallel  illustration,  nor  do  we  come 
across  any  such  Vedic  text. 

foiMifcjrft  *tt  uwn 


«TT  Alternatively  (even)  on  the  (assumption 

of  the)  possession  of  knowledge  etc.  cRT-anrf^ihr:  there  is  no 
remedy  of  that  defect. 

44.  Alternatively  even  if  (it  be  assumed  that  Vasudeva  and 
others  are)  possessed  of  knowledge,  (majesty,  etc.),  still  the 
defect  cannot  be  remedied. 


442  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  ii.  44 

Opponent :  It  may  rather  be  the  case  that  these  Samkar$aija 
and  others  are  not  considered  to  be  the  individual  souls  and  so 
on. 

In  what  way  are  they  conceived  then? 

They  are  all  believed  in  as  Gods,  being  endowed  with  all 
such  divine  attributes  as  the  mental  power  of  knowledge  and 
divinity,  physical  strength,  heroism,  and  boldness;  they  are  all 
Vasudevas  to  be  sure,  free  from  the  defects  (of  likes,  dislikes, 
etc.),  not  born  of  Nature,  and  free  from  destruction  etc.  Hence 
the  defect  alluded  to,  of  origin  being  impossible,  does  not  arise. 

V edantin :  To  this  our  reply  is  that  even  so  that  defect  is  not 
remedied;  the  impossibility  of  origin  persists  all  the  same.  The 
idea  is  that  the  defect  of  the  impossibility  of  origin  does  crop 
up  from  another  side. 

How? 

If  the  idea  be  this  that  these  four  Gods,  counting  from 
Vasudeva,  are  entirely  different  from  one  another  and  are  yet 
possessed  of  equal  attributes,  and  that  they  do  not  constitute  a 
single  Self,  then  it  is  useless  to  imgine  many  Gods,  since  the 
divine  functions  can  be  accomplished  by  a  single  one.  Besides, 
this  goes  against  their  own  conclusion,  inasmuch  as  it  is  admitted 
that  God  as  Vasudeva  alone  is  the  supreme  Reality. 

Again,  if  the  position  be  this  that  these  four  forms  belong  to 
a  single  God,  though  they  have  equal  attributes,  still  the  impos¬ 
sibility  of  origin  remains  where  it  was.  For  in  the  absence  of 
any  distinguishing  quality,  Samkarsana  cannot  spring  from 
Vasudeva,  nor  can  Pradyumna  from  Samkarsana,  or  Aniruddha 
from  Pradyumna.  As  between  the  cause  and  effect,  some  dis¬ 
tinction  has  got  to  be  admitted  as  existing,  as  in  the  case  of  clay 
and  a  pot,  for  unless  some  peculiarity  exists,  it  is  not  possible  to 
distinguish  them  as  cause  and  effect.  But  in  any  one  or  all  of 
them,  counting  from  Vasudeva,  the  followers  of  the  Pancaratra 
school  do  not  admit  any  distinction  created  by  degrees  of 
knowledge,  majesty,  etc.;  for  they  believe  that  all  the  forms  are 
but  Vasudeva  without  any  distinction.  Besides,  these  forms  of 
God  cannot  remain  confined  within  the  number  four,  since 
they  believe  that  the  whole  universe,  starting  from  Brahma  and 
ending  with  a  clump  of  grass,  is  but  a  form  of  God. 


II.  ii.  45  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  443 

fasrfd^rr^  hah 

^  And  owing  to  contradiction. 

45.  Besides ,  (in  this  scripture)  many  contradictions  are  met 
with  and  it  runs  c owner  to  the  Vedas. 

And  in  the  scripture  of  the  Bhagavatas  many  kinds  of  con¬ 
tradiction  are  in  evidence,  concerning,  for  instance,  qualities  and 
the  things  qualified.  Thus  one  comes  across  beliefs  like  this.  The 
qualities,  viz  the  power  of  knowledge  and  divinity,  physical 
strength,  heroism,  and  boldness,  are  nothing  but  so  many  selves 
and  they  are  the  same  as  Vasudeva,  the  Lord.  Moreover,  this 
scripture  contradicts  the  Vedas,  since  it  is  seen  to  cast  a  slur 
on  the  Vedas  by  declaring,  “Not  finding  the  highest  good  in 
the  four  Vedas,  Saodilya  studied  this  scripture”.  Therefore  it  is 
concluded  that  this  assumption  is  illogical. 


Section  III 


Topic  1:  Origin  of  Space 

Introduction  :  In  various  places  in  the  Upani$ads  we  come 
across  texts  dealing  with  creation  etc.  which  seem  to  represent 
different  schools  of  thought.  Some  mention  the  origin  of  space, 
while  others  do  not;  similarly  some  mention  the  origin  of  air, 
while  some  do  not;  so  also  with  regard  to  the  individual  soul 
and  the  organs  and  senses.  In  the  same  way,  contradiction  is 
met  with  in  the  different  Upani$ads  in  the  matter  of  the  order 
of  creation  etc.  The  ground  for  ignoring  the  opponents’  points 
of  view  was  shown  to  be  their  self-contradiction.  So  our  own 
point  of  view  may  run  the  risk  of  being  ignored  on  that  very 
ground  of  self-contradiction.  Hence  begins  the  succeeding 
amplification  (in  two  sections)  for  clarifying  the  purport  of 
all  the  Upani$adic  texts  about  creation.  And  when  that  purport 
is  clarified,  the  result  achieved  will  of  course  be  the  removal 
of  the  doubt  already  mentioned.  So  to  begin  with,  it  is  being 
considered  about  space  as  to  whether  it  has  any  origin  or  not. 

Pseudo-V edantin :  As  to  that,  it  is  being  propounded: 

*  II  $11 

^  Not  space  3 p^:  because  not  heard  of. 

1.  Space  is  not  (a  created  thing),  since  this  is  not  heard  of  in 
(some  of)  the  Upanisads. 

Space  does  not  certainly  originate. 

Why? 

“Since  this  is  not  heard  of.”  There  is  no  mention  of  it  in  the 
context  dealing  with  creation.  For  in  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad 
occurs  the  text,  “O  amiable  one,  all  this  was  but  Existence  in 
the  beginning — one  without  a  second”  (VI.  ii.  1),  where 
Brahman,  called  Existence,  is  presented  as  the  topic,  and  then 
with  regard  to  this  Brahman,  it  is  said,  “That  deliberated”  and 


II.iii.2] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


445 


“That  created  fire”  (VI.  ii.  3),  where  fire,  (usually)  occupying 
the  middle  place  among  the  five  great  elements,  is  placed  first 
and  mention  is  made  of  the  creation  of  (only)  the  three  elements 
fire,  water,  and  food  (earth).  Vedic  texts  are  the  valid  means 
to  us  in  the  matter  of  generating  knowledge  about  the  super- 
sensuous  things.  And  no  text  is  in  evidence  here  proving  the 
origin  of  space.  Hence  space  has  no  birth. 

srfei  3  irii 

But  arfer  there  is. 

2.  But  there  is  (a  mention  of  the  origin  of  space). 

Opponent :  The  word  “but”  is  used  to  indicate  the  preference 
for  another  point  of  view.  Space  might  not  have  been  mentioned 
as  having  any  origin  in  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad,  but  it  is  (so 
mentioned)  in  another  Upani$ad.  After  starting  with,  “Truth, 
Knowledge,  Infinity  is  Brahman”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  the  followers  of 
the  Taittiriya  recension  recite  thus,  “From  that  Self,  that  is 
such,  originated  space”  (II.  i.  1).  Thereby  the  two  Upani$ads 
come  into  conflict,  inasmuch  as  creation  starts  in  one  with  fire, 
and  in  another  with  space. 

Vedanthi :  Is  it  not  proper  that  these  two  Upani$adic  passages 
should  be  reconciled? 

Opponent :  They  should  truly  be  reconciled;  but  it  is  not 
known  how  to  do  so. 

Why? 

For  the  creator  who  is  mentioned  only  once  in,  “That  created 
fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  cannot  reasonably  be  brought  (simulta¬ 
neously)  into  association  with  two  created  things  (fire  and 
space)  by  asserting,-  “That  created  fire,  That  created  space”. 

Veddntin :  Is  not  an  agent,  mentioned  but  once,  seen  to  have 
(successive)  connection  with  two  different  acts,  as  in  the  state¬ 
ment,  “He  cooks  rice  after  cooking  a  curry”?  Similarly  we  can 
connect  the  creator  with  the  two  created  tilings  by  saying, 
“That  created  fire  after  creating  space.” 

Opponent :  That  is  not  logical.  For  in  the  Chandogya,  fire  is 
understood  as  the  first  creation,  whereas  in  the  Taittiriya  space 


446  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [E.  iii.  2 

comes  first.  And  both  cannot  be  the  first  creation.  Hereby  is 
also  exposed  the  contradiction  involved  in  other  Vedic  texts. 
Thus  in  the  text,  “From  that  Self,  which  is  such,  originated 
space’'  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  the  ablative  case  (in  atmanah — from  the 
Self)  and  origination  are  mentioned  but  once;  now  to  connect 
these  two  (ablative  case  and  origination)  with  both  space  and 
fire  at  the  same  time  to  imply,  “From  that  originated  space,  from 
that  originated  fire”,  will  not  be  logical.  Besides,  a  different  pro¬ 
cess  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  “From  air  came  fire”  (Tai.  II.  i)1. 

Faced  with  this  contradition,  somebody  else  says: 

ll^ll 

Secondary  because  of  impossibility. 

3.  (The  Upanifadic  passage  about  creation  of  space  has)  a 
secondary  sense ,  for  real  creation  is  impossible. 

Pseudo-Vedantin :  Space  has  no  origin,  just  because  there  is 
no  Vedic  mention.  As  for  the  other  text  quoted  as  speaking  of 
the  origin  of  space,  that  must  have  “a  secondary  sense”. 

Why? 

“Because  of  impossibility”,  for  it  is  not  possible  to  establish 
the  origin  of  space  so  long  as  the  followers  of  the  views  of  the 
venerable  Kanabhuk  (i.e.  Vaise$ikas)  live.  For  they  set  aside  the 
theory  of  the  origin  of  space  just  because  of  the  absence  of  the 
requisite  causes.  All  that  is  seen  to  originate,  does  so  from  the 
inherent  (material),  non-inherent  (concomitant),  and  efficient 
causes.  And  an  inherent  cause  of  an  object  is  constituted  by  an 
abundance  of  substance  of  the  same  class.  But  for  space  there 
can  be  no  such  abundance  of  any  substance  of  the  same  class, 
which  can  constitute  its  inherent  cause;  nor  is  there  any  con¬ 
junction  of  such  substances  which  can  be  accepted  as  the  non- 
inherent  cause  from  which  space  can  emerge.  And  since  these 
two  causes  are  absent,  any  efficient  cause  for  space,  which  func- 

1Just  as  the  Chandogya  contradicts  Taittiriya,  so  also  the  latter  con¬ 
tradicts  the  former.  First,  the  precedence  of  fire  in  Chandogya  is  irrecon¬ 
cilable,  Secondly,  in  Taittiriya,  air  is  the  source  of  fire;  in  Chandogya, 
the  Self  is  the  source. 


II.  iii.  4] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


447 


tions  when  these  are  favourable,  becomes  a  far  cry.  In  the  case 
of  fire,  etc.,  however,  which  have  origin,  it  is  possible  for  them 
to  have  some  peculiarity  before  and  after  creation;  for  instance, 
such  phenomena  (or  effect)  as  illumination  do  not  exist  before 
their  creation,  but  they  come  to  exist  after  creation.  But  for 
space,  no  such  peculiarity  can  be  conceived  of  either  before  or 
after  creation.  For  before  the  creation  of  space,  what  indeed 
can  be  conceived  of  as  existing  without  space,  interstices,  or 
cavities?  Moreover,  space  is  proved  to  be  without  any  origin  on 
account  of  its  being  different  in  nature  from  earth  etc.  and 
owing  to  its  characteristics  of  all-pervasiveness  etc.  Hence,  just 
as  we  meet  with  such  expressions  in  common  usage  as,  “Make 
space  (i.e.  room)”,  “Space  (room)  is  provided”,  and  so  on,  in 
which  the  word  space  is  used  in  a  secondary  sense  (to  mean 
room);  or  just  as  there  are  references  to  the  differences  in  the 
same  space  in  a  secondary  sense  in  such  expressions  as,  “the 
space  in  a  pot”,  “the  space  in  a  jar”,  “the  space  in  a  house”;  or 
just  as  there  are  such  expressions  even  in  the  Vedas  as,  “They 
sacrifice  the  forest-animals  in  the  spaces”;  similarly  the  Vedic 
texts  about  creation  are  to  be  understood  in  a  secondary  (or 
figurative)  sense. 


51551^?  IIVII 

^  And  from  Vedic  texts. 

4.  And  (this  is  borne  out )  by  Vedic  texts . 

Pseudo-Vedantin  :  The  Vedas  as  a  matter  of  fact,  declare  the 
birthlessness  of  space,  since  it  is  stated,  “Now  the  subtle — it  is 
air  and  space.  It  is  immortal”  (Br.  II.  iii.  3);  for  that  which  is 
immortal  cannot  have  an  origin.  And  the  text  “It  is  all-pervasive 
and  eternal  like  space”,  while  comparing  Brahman  with  space  in 
respect  of  the  attributes  of  omnipresence  and  eternality,  also 
indicates  that  space  has  those  two  characteristics.  As  such,  space 
cannot  reasonably  be  maintained  to  have  an  origin.  There  is 
also  the  statement,  “This  Self  is  to  be  known  to  be  as  infinite 
as  this  space”,  as  also  the  texts,  “Brahman  has  space  as  Its  body” 
(Tai.  I.  vi.  2),  “Space  is  the  Self”  (Tai.  I.  vii.  1).  If  space  had 


448  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [ILiii.4 

an  origin,  it  could  not  have  been  used  as  an  attribute  of  Brahman, 
like  blueness  in  the  case  of  a  lotus.  So  it  is  understood  that 
Brahman  is  ever  on  a  par  with  space. 

IIHII 

=ET  And  ctrT  it  is  possible  for  the  same  (word) 

like  the  word  Brahman. 

5.  And  it  is  possible  for  the  same  'word  (“originated” )  to  have 
(primary  and  secondary  senses)  like  the  word  Brahman . 

This  aphorism  follows  in  succession  the  series  of  objections 
raised  about  the  word  “originated”. 

It  may  be  objected  thus:  How  can  the  single  word  “origi¬ 
nated”  occurring  in  the  context,  “From  that  Self,  which  is  such, 
originated  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  have  the  primary  sense  when 
used  at  a  later  stage  in  connection  with  the  words  fire  and  the 
rest  which  come  subsequently,  whereas  it  has  a  secondary  sense 
when  used  (earlier)  in  connection  with  space? 

Pseudo-  V edantin :  Therefore  the  reply  is  being  given.  Just 
as  the  word  Brahman  can  have  primary  and  secondary  senses 
with  reference  to  different  objects,  so  also  the  same  word  “origi¬ 
nated”  can  have  primary  and  secondary  meanings  with  reference 
to  different  objects.  As  for  instance,  the  same  word  Brahman 
has  a  secondary  sense  with  reference  to  food  etc.  (in  the  expres¬ 
sions  “Food  is  Brahman”  etc.),  occurring  in  the  context,  “Try  to 
know  Brahman  through  concentration  of  mind;  concentration 
is  Brahman”  (Tai.  III.  2);  but  it  has  a  primary  sense  with  regard 
to  Bliss  (in  “He  knew  Bliss  to  be  Brahman” — Tai  III.  vi.)  in 
the  same  context;  or  as  the  word  Brahman  is  used  by  way  of 
courtesy  with  regard  to  concentration  which  is  a  means  to  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman,  but  directly  (in  the  primary  sense)  in 
connection  with  the  Brahman  to  be  known;  similar  is  the  case 
here. 

Objection :  If,  again,  space  has  no  origin,  how  can  the  declara¬ 
tion,  “(Brahman  is)  one  only  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1), 
be  supported?  For  does  not  Brahman  come  to  have  a  second  to 
Itself  by  the  presence  of  space?  How  then  can  it  be  true  that 


n.  iii.  5]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  449 

all  becomes  known  when  Brahman  is  known  (for  the  unpro¬ 
duced  space  remains  still  unknown)? 

Pseudo-V edantin :  That  is  being  answered.  The  text,  “One 
only”  can  be  justified  when  considered  with  reference  to  (the 
absence  of)  Its  own  effects  (before  creation).  Somebody,  for 
instance,  who  had  seen  clay,  turning  rod,  and  potter’s  wheel  at 
the  potter’s  house  on  the  previous  day  and  then  notices  next  day 
different  kinds  of  vessels  spread  about,  might  say,  “It  was  all 
but  clay  alone  the  other  day”.  What  he  would  imply  by  that 
declaration  would  be  that  the  products  of  clay  alone  did  not 
exist  on  the  previous  day,  but  not  that  the  rod  etc.  also  were 
not  there.  Similarly  the  text  (“without  a  second”)  speaking  about 
(the)  non-existence  of  a  second  rules  out  any  other  ordainer: 
unlike  the  potter  who  is  observed  to  be  an  ordainer  apart  from 
the  clay  which  is  the  material  cause  of  the  earthen  vessels,  there 
is  no  other  ordainer  for  the  universe  apart  from  Brahman  which 
is  its  material  cause.  And  it  cannot  be  that  Brahman  becomes 
associated  with  a  second  entity  owing  merely  to  the  presence  of 
space.  Multiplicity  is  created  by  differences  in  the  characteristics 
(of  entities).  But  it  is  not  a  fact  that  before  creation  Brahman 
and  space  have  different  characteristics;  because  like  milk  and 
water  in  a  mixture,  they  both  (then)  possess  the  common 
properties  of  pervasiveness,  want  of  features,  (partlessness, 
formlessness),  etc.  At  the  time  of  creation,  however,  Brahman 
becomes  active  for  producing  the  universe,  while  the  other  (viz 
space)  remains  motionless;  and  hence  it  is  thought  that  they  are 
different.  In  this  way  also  the  identity  of  Brahman  and  space 
in  a  secondary  sense  stands  proved  according  to  such  Vedic 
texts  as,  “Brahman  has  space  as  Its  body”  (Tai.  I.  vi.  2).  And 
thus  also  is  proved  the  attainment  of  omniscience  through  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman.  Moreover,  whatever  has  origin,  origi¬ 
nates  in  some  space  and  time  that  are  non-separate  from  the 
space  and  time  of  space  itself,  which  again  is  non-separate  from 
Brahman.  So  when  Brahman  and  Its  effects  are  known,  space 
also  becomes  known  ipso  facto.  Just  as  the  few  drops  of  water 
thrown  into  a  potful  of  milk  become  taken  up  when  the  milk 
itself  is  taken,  for  when  the  milk  is  taken  up,  the  drops  of 
water  do  not  stand  apart  to  be  taken  up  separately,  so  also  when 
29 


450  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  [II.iii.5 

Brahman  is  known,  space  becomes  known  as  a  matter  of  course, 
for  space  does  not  stand  apart  from  Brahman  and  Its  effects 
either  in  space  or  time.  Hence  the  Vedic  text  about  the  origin 
of  space  has  a  figurative  sense. 

Veddntin:  Such  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says: 


5rfen‘-3T5rft':  The  declaration  stands  unaffected 
from  the  non-difference  (of  effects);  (confirmed)  from 

Vedic  texts. 

6.  The  (Vedic)  assertion  (that  uall  things  become  known 
when  the  one  is  known”)  can  remain  unaffected  only  if  all  the 
effects  are  non-diff event  from  Brahman;  and  this  is  confirmed  by 
Vedic  texts . 

In  all  the  Upani$ads,  individually,  we  come  across  a  declara¬ 
tion  on  the  following  line,  “That  by  knowing  which  all  that  is 
not  heard  becomes  heard,  all  that  is  not  thought  becomes 
thought,  all  that  is  not  known  becomes  known”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  3), 
“All  this  becomes  known,  my  dear,  when  the  Self  is  seen 
through  hearing,  thinking,  and  meditation”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  6), 
“What  is  that,  sir,  by  knowing  which  all  this  becomes  known?” 
(Mu.  I.  i.  3),  “There  is  no  knowledge  of  all  outside  Myself”. 
“That  declaration  can  remain  unaffected”,  unhampered,  “only 
if  all  things  (without  exception)  are  non-different  from  the 
Brahman”  that  is  to  be  known.  For  if  anything  be  different  from 
Brahman,  the  declaration  that  “all  becomes  known  when  one  is 
known”  will  be  stultified.  And  that  non-difference  can  be  up¬ 
held  justifiably  only  if  all  things  without  exception  originate 
from  Brahman  alone.  And  it  is  in  accordance  with  the  logic  of 
the  identity  of  the  material  cause  and  its  effects,  that  the  justi¬ 
fiability  of  the  declaration  is  revealed  in  the  Vedic  texts  them¬ 
selves.  It  is  precisely  for  this  reason  that  the  declaration  is  first 
made  in,  “That  by  which  the  things  unheard  become  heard”, 
and  then  this  declaration  is  confirmed  with  the  illustrations  of 
clay  etc.  which  are  calculated  to  establish  the  non- difference  of 
cause  and  effect.  It  is  in  affirmation  of  this  very  fact  that  the 


II.iii.6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  451 

subsequent  texts,  “O  amiable  one,  all  this  was  Existence  alone 
in  the  beginning,  one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  2),  “It  saw 
(or  thought),  It  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3)  show  that 
the  effects  arise  from  Brahman;  and  then  non-difference  is 
shown  in  the  texts  starting  with,  “All  this  has  that  alone 
as  its  Self”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  till  the  end  of  the  sixth 
Frapathaka.  Now  if  space  be  not  a  product  of  Brahman,  it 
will  remain  unknown  even  when  Brahman  is  known.  But 
that  will  undo  the  declaration.  It  is  not  proper,  however, 
to  invalidate  the  Vedas  by  hurting  this  declaration.  So  also 
in  every  Upani$ad,  the  appropriate  texts  establish  that  very 
declaration  with  the  help  of  suitable  illustrations,  for  instance, 
“  . . .  and  this  all  are  the  Self”  (Bj*.  II.  iv.  6),  “All  that  is  in  front 
is  but  the  immortal  Brahman”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11),  and  so  on. 
Accordingly,  space  also  originates  just  like  fire  and  the  rest.  The 
assertion  is  unjustifiable  that  space  has  no  origin  because  of  the 
absence  of  any  such  Vedic  statement;  for  another  Vedic  text, 
speaking  of  the  origin  of  space,  was  quoted  earlier,  viz  “From 
this  Self  that  is  such,  originated  space”  (Tai  II.  i.  2). 

Opponent :  True  it  was  quoted,  but  this  conflicts  with  this 
other  text,  “That  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3). 

Veddntin :  No,  for  all  the  Vedic  texts  have  a  unity  of  purport, 
(that  is  to  say,  they  can  be  reconciled). 

Opponent :  Let  the  non-contradictory  texts  have  a  unity  of 
purport  (and  be  reconcilable).  But  contradictions  have  been 
pointed  out  here  to  the  effect  that  the  creator  who  is  heard  of 
only  once  cannot  be  connected  with  two  things  to  be  created, 
that  the  two  things  cannot  both  be  born  first,  and  that  there  can 
be  no  possibility  of  alternativeness  (in  either  of  the  two  being 
the  first). 

Veddntin :  That  is  no  defect,  for  the  creation  of  fire  is  heard 
of  third  in  the  Taittirlya  Upani^ad  in,  “From  that  Self  which  is 
such,  was  born  space,  from  space  air,  and  from  air  fire”  (II.  i.  2). 
And  this  text  cannot  be  construed  in  any  other  way,  whereas 
the  Chandogya  text  can  be  interpreted  thus,  “Having  created 
space  and  air,  That  (Brahman)  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3).  This 
(latter)  text,  which  has  for  its  main  purport  the  presentation  of 
the  birth  of  fire,  cannot  rule  out  the  birth  of  space  well  known 


452 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[II.  iii.6 


in  other  Upani$ads,  for  the  same  single  sentence  cannot  operate 
in  two  ways.2  The  creator,  though  one,  can  create  many  prod¬ 
ucts  in  succession.  And  since  there  is  a  possibility  of  maintain¬ 
ing  a  unity  of  purport  (among  the  texts  by  reconciling  them),  a 
Vedic  text  should  not  be  abandoned  by  imagining  some  con¬ 
tradictory  meaning.  Again,  it  is  not  a  fact  that  we  want  to 
connect  the  same  creator,  heard  of  only  once,  with  the  two 
things  (space  and  fire)  that  are  to  be  created;  rather  a  second 
thing  to  be  created  is  drawn  upon  on  the  authority  of  another 
(i.e.  Taittiriya)  Upani$ad.3  Besides,  just  as  the  direct  mention 
of  the  creation  of  everything  from  Brahman  in  the  text,  “All 
this  is  certainly  Brahman,  for  everything  is  born  from,  rests  in, 
and  merges  in  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1),  does  not  overrule 
the  order  of  creation  stated  elsewhere  with  fire  as  the  first  (Ch. 
VI.  ii.  3),  similarly  the  Vedic  mention  of  creation  of  fire  from 
Brahman  cannot  rule  out  the  order  of  creation  with  space  in 
the  forefront  as  mentioned  in  another  (i.e.  Taittiriya)  Upani$ad. 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  sentence,  “Everything  is  bom  from, 
rests  in,  and  merges  in  Brahman;  worship  with  calmness”  (Ch. 
III.  xiv.  1),  meant  for  enjoining  (meditation  with)  tranquillity? 
This  is  not  a  passage  about  creation,  so  that  it  cannot  overrule 
the  order  of  creation  established  elsewhere  (in  the  Chandogya 
Upani$ad).  The  text,  “That  created  fire”,  however,  speaks  of 
creation  itself,  so  that  the  order  as  stated  there  in  the  (Chan¬ 
dogya  Upani$ad,  VI.  ii.  3)  has  to  be  accepted. 

Vedantin :  To  this  the  answer  is,  no;  for  the  entity  space,  as 
established  in  another  Upani$ad,  cannot  be  rejected  just  because 
fire  has  got  the  first  place  (somewhere);  for  an  order  follows 
the  nature  of  things.  Moreover,  in  the  text,  “That  created  fire”, 
no  (explicit)  word  indicating  order  is  in  evidence,  the  order 
being  posited  (merely)  from  the  implication  of  the  sentence. 
That,  however,  is  ruled  out  by  the  order  known  from  another 
Upani$ad,  viz  “from  air  comes  fire”  (Tai.  II.  1).  As  for  assign¬ 
ing  the  first  place  to  space  and  fire,  either  alternatively  or 

a  If  it  means  the  creation  of  fire,  it  cannot  also  mean  the  non-creation  of 
space. 

*We  arc  not  open  to  the  charge  of  making  one  sentence  of  Chandogya 
serve  two  purposes;  we  rather  rely  on  two  sentences. 


II.  iii.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  453 

jointly,  that  is  ruled  out  because  of  impossibility  and  non-accept¬ 
ance  (by  the  Upanisads).  Hence  there  is  no  contradiction 
between  the  two  texts.  Moreover,  the  assertion,  “That  by 
knowing  which  things  unheard  become  heard”,  is  found  at  the 
commencement.  For  confirming  this  statement,  one  has  to 
include  space  among  the  things  created,  though  it  is  not  men¬ 
tioned  (there  in  the  Chandogya).  That  being  so,  it  is  all  the 
more  unreasonable  not  to  take  space  into  account,  though  it  is 
mentioned  in  the  Taittiriya  Upani$ad: 

And  the  statement  was  made  that  space  being  non-different 
from  everything  so  far  as  the  time-space  relation  is  concerned, 
it  becomes  known,  as  a  matter  of  course,  along  with  Brahman 
and  Its  products,  and  that  hence  the  declaration  (“everything 
becomes  known  when  one  is  known”)  is  not  compromised,  nor 
is  the  Vedic  text  “one  without  a  second”  contradicted,  for  like 
milk  and  water  (mixed  together),  Brahman  and  space  can 
reasonably  be  non-diffcrent.  As  to  this,  our  answer  is  that  this 
fact  of  everything  becoming  known  through  the  knowledge  of 
one  is  not  to  be  understood  on  the  analogy  of  milk  and  water. 
From  the  presentation  of  the  illustrations  of  clay  etc.  (in  the 
Upani$ad)  it  is  to  be  understood  that  this  all-knowingness  is  to 
be  explained  rather  in  conformity  with  the  logic  of  the  (non¬ 
difference  of  the)  material  and  its  products.  If  omniscience  is 
understood  in  conformity  with  the  illustration  of  milk  and 
water,  it  will  not  be  perfect  knowledge,  for  the  knowledge  of 
water  acquired  through  the  knowledge  of  milk  is  not  a  com¬ 
plete  knowledge  at  all.  And  it  cannot  be  argued  that  like  men, 
the  Vedas  also  ascertain  a  thing  through  delusive,  equivocal,  or 
deceptive  statements  etc.  Moreover,  if  the  emphatic  statement, 
“One  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  2),  be  interpreted  on  the 
analogy  of  milk  and  water,  it  will  be  adversely  affected.  It  is 
not  also  proper  to  assert  that  this  all-knowingness  (i.e.  the 
knowledge  of  everything  arising  from  the  knowledge  of  one), 
as  also  the  state  of  being  one  without  a  second,  relates  only  to 
one  particular  feature  of  a  substance,  viz  the  modifications  of 
itself;  for  in  that  case  these  statements  will  be  equally  valid  even 
in  the  cases  of  clay  etc.,4  so  that  they  have  no  need  to  be 

4  All  modifications  of  cla y  are  known  by  knowing  clay.  So  this  should 


454  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  6 

presented  (in  the  Upani$ad)  as  unique  truths  (not  known  except 
through  the  Upani$ads),  as  it  is  actually  done  in  the  text,  “O 
Svetaketu,  now  that  you  appear  to  be  so  conceited,  proud  of 
your  knowledge,  and  irreverent,  did  you  inquire  about  that 
subject  of  instruction  after  knowing  which  all  that  is  unheard 
becomes  heard?”  etc.  (Ch.  VI.  i.  2-3).  Hence  it  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  that  the  all-knowingness  is  concerned  with  the  knowledge 
of  everything  without  exception,  and  that  this  statement  is  made 
from  the  point  of  view  that  everything  is  an  effect  of  Brahman. 

As  for  the  statement  that  the  Vedic  text  about  the  origin  of 
space  is  to  be  taken  in  a  secondary  sense,  since  the  creation  of 
space  in  the  primary  sense  is  impossible,  our  reply  is  this: 

g  iiv3ii 

g  But  faqr*T:  separateness  (is  present)  wherever 

there  is  a  modification  (i.e.  effect),  as  it  is  noticeable 

in  the  world. 

7.  But  (space  is  a  product);  for  separateness  persists  'wherever 
there  is  an  effect,  as  it  is  seen  in  the  'world . 

The  word  “but”  is  used  for  barring  out  any  apprehension 
of  impossibility.  In  the  matter  of  the  possibility  of  the  creation 
of  space,  no  doubt  should  be  entertained.  Whatever  is  known 
as  a  product  in  this  world — be  it  a  pot,  a  pitcher,  or  a  jar;  a 
bracelet,  an  armlet,  or  an  ear-drop,  a  needle,  an  arrow,  or  a 
sword — everything  is  seen  to  be  a  separate  entity;  but  nothing 
that  is  not  a  product  is  seen  to  be  separate  (as  for  instance  the 
Self).  And  space  is  known  to  be  separate  from  earth  etc.,  hence 
space  also  must  be  a  product.  Hereby  it  is  also  explained  how 
directions,  time,  mind,  and  atoms  are  also  products. 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  Self  also  separate  from  space  etc,  and 
so  does  It  not  also  become  a  product  like  a  pot  etc.? 

Vedantin:  No,  for  there  is  the  Vedic  text,  “From  the  Self 

constitute  all-knowingness.  And  vessels  being  n on-different  from  clay, 
clay  should  be  “without  a  second”.  But  this  is  absurd,  because  the  Vedas 
are  not  meant  for  such  commonplace  information. 


II.  iii.  7]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  455 

arose  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  3).  Now,  if  even  the  Self  be  a  product, 
then  since  nothing  higher  than  the  Self  is  heard  of  (as  the  cause), 
all  the  products  counting  from  space  will  be  without  a  Self  (i.e. 
ultimate  substance),  just  because  the  Self  is  itself  a  product. 
And  this  will  give  rise  to  nihilism.  Any  idea  of  the  possibility 
of  denying  the  existence  of  the  Self  is  illogical,  just  because  it 
is  the  Self.5  The  Self  is  not  an  adventitious  effect  of  any  cause, 
it  being  self-established.6  For  the  Self  of  any  one  does  not 
require  to  be  revealed  to  any  one  with  the  help  of  any  other 
means.7  For  such  means  of  knowledge  as  perception  etc.,  that 
are  taken  up  for  proving  the  existence  of  other  things  that 
remain  unknown,  belong  to  this  very  Self.8  Not  that  space  and 
other  tilings  are  understood  by  any  one  to  be  self-established, 
independently  of  other  means  of  knowledge.  But  the  Self  being 
the  basis  of  all  such  empirical  dealings  as  the  use  of  the  means 
of  knowledge,  stands  there  as  a  postulate  even  prior  to  the  use 
of  those  means.  And  it  is  not  possible  to  deny  such  a  Self;  for 
it  is  an  adventitious  thing  alone  that  can  be  repudiated,  but  not 
so  one’s  own  nature.  The  Self  constitutes  the  very  nature  of  the 
man  who  would  deny  it.  The  heat  of  fire  cannot  be  denied  by 
the  fire  itself.  Thus  it  is  that  when  a  man  says,  “It  is  I  myself 
who  know  the  present  object  now,  it  is  I  who  know  the  past 
and  the  remote  past,  and  it  is  I  who  shall  know  the  future  and 
the  remote  future”,  it  is  seen  that  though  the  object  to  be 
known  has  different  modes  varying  with  the  past,  present,  and 
future,  the  knower  remains  unchanged;  for  he  has  the  nature  of 
being  ever  present.  Similarly  even  when  the  body  is  reduced  to 
ashes,  the  Self  is  not  reduced  to  nothing,  Its  nature  being  such 

5  Does  the  one  who  would  deny  the  Self  exist  or  not?  If  he  exists,  he 
is  himself  the  Self;  if  he  does  not  exist  then  the  denial  is  not  possible. 

0  Its  existence  and  revelation  arc  not  dependent  on  any  other  cause.  It 
could  be  denied  if  it  were  a  dependent  effect. 

7  “The  all-pervading  Self  is  self-effulgent”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  9),  “By  his  light 
all  this  is  lighted  variously”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  15). 

ftOn  what  need  one  depend  for  proving  the  existence  of  that  Self, 
through  whose  grace  all  such  things  as  the  knower,  means  of  knowledge, 
object  of  knowledge,  and  cognition  derive  their  substance?” — Surcsvara- 
carya.  So  the  Self  precedes  all  these  means  of  knowledge,  and  they  are 
valid  by  depending  on  It. 


456  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.iii.7 

that  It  is  ever  present;  and  precisely  because  of  this  it  is  not 
possible  to  conceive  of  any  change  in  Its  nature.  Thus  owing  to 
this  very  fact  of  its  nature  of  being  undeniable,  the  Self  is  not  a 
product,  whereas  space  etc.  are  products. 

As  for  the  argument  that  (for  its  own  production)  space  has 
not  got  an  abundance  of  material  substance  of  the  same  class 
(which  can  produce  it),  that  is  being  refuted.  For  one  thing, 
there  is  no  such  rule  that  things  of  the  same  class,  and  not  of 
different  classes,  produce  an  effect.  For  the  yarns  and  their 
conjunction  (constituting  the  inherent  and  non-inherent  causes 
of  the  cloth)  do  not  belong  to  the  same  class;  since  they  are 
classified  as  substance  and  quality.  Nor  do  the  instrumental 
causes,  e.g.  the  shuttle,  the  loom,  etc.,  belong  invariably  to  the 
same  class.  It  may  be  argued  that  this  rule  about  belonging  to 
the  same  class,  is  upheld  in  the  case  of  the  inherent  causes  only, 
but  not  in  the  case  of  other  (non-inherent  and  instrumental) 
causes.  But  that  too  is  not  universally  true.  For  it  is  seen  that  a 
single  rope  is  made  of  cotton  yarn  and  cow’s  hair  belonging 
to  different  classes;  so  also  they  weave  chequered  blankets  with 
cotton  yarn  and  wool  etc.  If,  however,  this  rule  be  upheld  by 
relying  on  the  common  properties  of  having  existence,  substance, 
etc.,  then  the  rule  itself  becomes  useless,  for  in  that  case  any¬ 
thing  can  belong  to  the  same  class  as  any  other.  Again,  there  is 
no  such  rule  that  an  effect  is  produced  by  a  multiplicity  of 
things,  but  not  by  one,  single  cause;  for  in  the  cases  of  an  atom 
and  the  mind,  an  initial  activity  has  to  be  admitted,  it  being 
upheld  (by  you)  that  an  atom  or  a  mind  starts  its  own  initial 
activity  by  itself,  and  not  in  conjunction  with  any  other 
thing.9 

Opponent :  The  rule  about  a  multiplicity  (of  materials)  pro¬ 
ducing  an  effect  relates  to  the  production  of  things  (and  not 
production  as  such). 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  what  is  admitted  (by  you)  is  trans¬ 
formation  (as  against  emergence  out  of  nothing,  advocated  by 

•Conjunction  is  the  non-inherent  cause  of  a  dyad  (produced  through 
the  conjunction  of  two  atoms);  and  it  is  also  the  cause  of  cognition 
(produced  by  the  conjunction  of  mind  and  soul).  For  these  conjunctions, 
an  initial  activity  is  admitted  in  the  atom  and  the  mind  respectively. 


II.  iii.  7]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  457 

the  Vaise$ikas).  The  above  rule  can  be  true  if  it  be  a  fact  that 
a  material  cause,  in  association  with  conjunction,  produces  an 
entirely  new  thing;  but  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  position  upheld 
is  that  the  very  same  material  comes  to  be  called  an  effect  when 
it  attains  a  different  state  with  certain  peculiarities.  And  there, 
again,  sometimes  many  things  get  transformed  into  a  single 
effect,  as  for  instance,  earth,  seed,  etc.  into  a  sprout  and  some¬ 
times  a  single  thing  gets  transformed,  as  milk  into  curd  etc. 
There  is  no  divine  ukase  that  only  a  multiplicity  of  (material) 
causes  must  produce  an  effect.  Hence  on  the  authority  of  the 
Vedic  texts  it  is  firmly  ascertained  that  the  universe  sprang  from 
the  one  Brahman  alone  in  a  regular  order  beginning  with  the 
origin  of  the  great  elements,  space  and  the  rest.  And  thus  it  has 
been  stated,  “If  it  be  said  that  Brahman  cannot  be  the  cause, 
since  one  is  seen  to  collect  materials  (for  the  performance  of 
an  act)  then  we  say,  no;  for  it  is  possible  on  the  analogy  of  milk 
(turning  into  curd)”  (B.  S.  II.  i.  24). 

And  the  assertion  is  false  that  no  such  distinction  between  the 
conditions  of  space  before  and  after  its  creation  can  be  con¬ 
ceived  of  as  can  make  the  creation  of  space  a  possibility.  For  it 
can  be  understood  that  the  very  distinctive  attribute  (of  sound) 
by  virtue  of  which  space  becomes  distinguished  from  earth  etc. 
at  present  and  is  comprehended  as  having  an  individual  nature 
of  its  own,  (that  very  distinctive  attribute)  did  not  exist  before 
creation.  And  from  the  Vedic  texts,  “Brahman  is  without  space”, 
it  can  be  understood  that  Brahman  is  free  from  the  character¬ 
istics  of  space,  just  as  much  as  it  is  known  from  such  Vedic 
passages  as,  “not  gross,  not  fine”  (Bj\  III.  viii.  8),  that  Brahman 
is  not  possessed  of  such  attributes  as  grossness  etc.  that  belong 
to  (Its  products)  earth  etc.  Thus  it  is  proved  that  before  crea¬ 
tion  Brahman  was  without  space. 

The  assertion  is  wrong  that  space  is  birthless  owing  to  its 
being  dissimilar  in  character  to  earth  and  the  rest.  For  the  logical 
position  is  that  when  an  inference  about  the  impossibility  of 
origin  contradicts  a  Vedic  text,  it  stands  condemned  as  fallacious. 
And  we  showed  the  inference  about  the  creation  (of  space). 
Such  syllogisms  also  can  be  used  as:  Space  is  impermanent  like 
a  pot,  since  it  is  the  substratum  of  impermanent  attributes. 


458  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  7 

Opponent :  This  inference  does  not  hold  good  in  the  case  of 
the  Self.10 

Vedmtin :  Not  so,  for  the  possession  of  any  impermanent 
attribute  is  impossible  for  the  Self  according  to  one  who  holds 
on  to  the  Upani$ads.  And  the  possession  of  all-pervasiveness  etc. 
by  space  is  impossible  according  to  one  who  believes  in  the 
origin  of  space. 

As  for  the  assertions  that  space  is  eternal  on  the  authority  of 
the  Vedas  (B.  S.  II.  iii.  4),  we  say  that  the  Vedic  mention  of 
immortality  of  space  in  that  text  (Bp.  II.  iii.  3)  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  in  the  same  sense  as  the  statement,  “The  heavenly  beings 
arc  immortal”;  for  origin  and  dissolution  of  space  have  been 
expounded  earlier.  Even  when  it  is  said,  “(The  Self  is)  all- 
pervasive  and  eternal  like  space”,  the  comparison  is  made  with 
the  well-known  vastness  of  space,  so  as  to  reveal  the  Self’s 
unsurpassable  vastness,  but  not  to  equate  the  Self  with  space. 
This  is  like  the  declaration,  “The  sun  runs  like  an  arrow”, 
where  the  point  of  comparison  is  the  quickness  of  motion,  but 
not  any  equality  of  speed  with  the  arrow.  Hereby  is  explained 
the  Vedic  text  expounding  infinitude  through  illustration.11 

Besides,  from  such  texts  as,  “Greater  than  space”,  space 
is  proved  to  have  lesser  dimensions  than  Brahman.  And  the 
text,  “There  is  nothing  to  compare  with  Him”  (Sv.  IV.  19), 
shows  that  Brahman  is  incomparable.  The  text,  “Everything  else 
but  this  is  perishable”  (Br.  III.  iv.  2),  shows  that  all  things — 
space  and  the  rest — other  than  Brahman  are  perishable.  And  the 
argument  that  the  birth  of  space  is  mentioned  in  the  Vedas  in  a 
secondary  sense,  like  the  term  Brahman  used  in  a  secondary 
sense  to  mean  tapas  (concentration),  has  been  refuted  with  the 
help  of  Vedic  texts  and  inference  proving  the  origin  of  space. 
Hence  it  is  established  that  space  is  a  product  of  Brahman. 


10  The  Self  possesses  such  impermanent  qualities  as  will,  intelligence, 
endeavour;  and  yet  your  Vedantins  call  the  Self  eternal. 

11  The  reference  is  to  such  Upanisadic  passages  as,  “The  illustration  is: 
just  as  space  is  infinite  so  also  is  the  Self  infinite”,  where  the  Self  being 
a  greater  entity  cannot  be  equated  with  a  lesser  entity  like  space,  possessed 
of  origin  and  destruction  as  it  is. 


n.iii.8] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  2:  Origin  of  Air 


459 


By  this  Rmfocir  air  oqr^TRT:  stands  explained. 

8.  Hereby  is  explained  air. 

This  aphorism  extends  (to  air)  the  conclusion  (about  origin) 
already  stated.  “Hereby”,  by  this  explanation  of  space,  matari- 
svan,  “air”,  supported  by  space,  also  stands  explained.”  In  its 
case  also  (as  in  that  of  space),  the  opposing  viewpoints  are  to 
be  suitably  formulated  (and  answered)  thus:  One  viewpoint  is 
that  air  has  no  origin,  since  this  is  not  stated  in  the  context 
dealing  with  creation  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad.  The  other 
view  is  that  this  is  mentioned  in  the  context  of  creation  in  the 
Taittirlya  Upanisad:  “Air  came  out  from  space”  (II.  1).  From 
this  it  follows  according  to  another  view  that  since  the  Upani$ads 
are  at  variance,  the  text  about  the  origin  of  air  must  bear  a 
secondary  sense;  for  air  can  have  no  origin,  since  that  is  impos¬ 
sible.  And  the  impossibility  is  shown  with  the  support  of  the 
text,  “This  then  is  the  deity,  called  air,  that  never  sets”  (i.e. 
ceases  from  action)  (Bj*.  I.  v.  22),  where  setting  down  is  denied, 
and  also  in  accordance  with  the  Vedic  statement  of  its  immor¬ 
tality  etc.  The  (Vedantin’s)  conclusion  is  that  air  must  have 
an  origin,  because  it  is  thus  that  the  declaration  (“everything 
becomes  known  when  one  is  known”)  is  not  set  at  naught,  and 
because  it  is  admitted  that  separateness  persists  wherever  there 
is  a  product  (B.  S.  II.  iii.  6-7).  The  denial  about  air  ever  going 
to  rest  is  made  within  the  range  of  inferior  knowledge  (of 
Hiranyagarbha);  it  is  a  relative  one  in  the  sense  that  air  is  not 
seen  to  go  to  rest  like  fire  and  the  rest.  And  the  Vedic  mention 
of  immortality  etc.  as  in,  “Air  and  inter-space — these  are 
immortal”  has  already  been  explained  (as  relative). 

Opponent :  Since  in  the  contexts  of  creation,  the  origin  or 
non-origin  of  air  and  space  is  mentioned  or  not  mentioned 
equally  by  the  Vedas,  let  there  be  a  single  topic  ( adhikarana  in 
the  Vedanta-sutras)  comprising  both.  So  why  should  you  resort 


460  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [n.  iii.  8 

to  a  process  of  extension  of  application  when  no  special  point 
is  at  issue? 

The  (Vedantin's)  answer  is:  This  is  quite  so.  Still  this  exten¬ 
sion  of  application  is  resorted  to  for  removing  the  doubt  from 
those  people  of  poor  intellect  who  base  their  misconceptions 
merely  on  words.  For  after  hearing  of  the  gloriousness  of  air  as 
a  thing  to  be  meditated  on,  as  stated  in  connection  with  the 
contemplation  on  merger  ( samvarga-andyd — Ch.  IV.  iii.  1-4) 
etc.,  and  from  such  facts  as  the  denial  of  its  setting  down,  some 
one  might  be  led  to  believe  that  air  is  eternal. 

Topic  3:  Origin  of  Brahman  Denied 

1 15.1 1 

g  But  impossible  ^r:  for  Existence  (Brahman) 

:  owing  to  illogicality. 

9.  But  (origin)  f or  Existence  (Brahman)  is  impossible  on 
account  of  illogicality. 

Hearing  that  even  space  and  air,  whose  birth  seems  to  be 
impossible,  have  still  an  origin,  somebody  might  be  led  to  think 
that  Brahman  too  must  have  some  source  of  origin.  Again, 
hearing  that  all  subsequent  products  come  out  of  space  etc., 
which  are  themselves  products,  somebody  might  think  that 
space  also,  in  its  turn,  sprang  from  Brahman  which  is  Itself  a 
product.  This  aphorism,  “But  origin  is  impossible”,  stands  for 
removing  that  misconception.  It  should  never  be  conceived  that 
Brahman  which  is  Existence  by  nature  can  come  out  of,  i.e. 
originate  from,  anything  else. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  illogicality”.  Brahman,  being  mere  Existence, 
cannot  certainly  originate  from  that  pure  Existence  Itself.  For  in 
the  absence  of  some  distinguishing  feature  a  causal  relationship 
cannot  be  reasonably  maintained.  Nor  can  Brahman  be  derived 
from  a  particular  form  of  Existence,  as  that  goes  against 
common  experience;  for  particulars  are  seen  to  emerge  from  the 
general,  as  pot  etc.  from  clay,  but  not  the  general  from  the 


II.  iii.  10]  BRAHMA- SCTRA-BHA5YA  4<51 

particulars.  Nor  can  Brahman  come  out  of  non-existence,  for 
non-existence  is  without  any  substance.  Besides,  an  objection  (to 
this)  is  contained  in  the  text,  “How  can  existence  come  out  of 
non-existence?”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  2).  And  a  creator  of  Brahman  is 
denied  in  the  text,  “He  is  the  cause,  the  ordainer  of  those  who 
stand  as  causes,12  He  has  no  begetter,  nor  any  ordainer”  (§v. 
VI.  9).  Again,  we  pointed  to  (texts  telling  of)  the  origin  of  space 
and  air;  but  Brahman  has  no  (such  text  about  Its)  origin.  This 
is  the  difference. 

Opponent :  Since  it  is  seen  that  products  come  out  from  other 
things  that  are  themselves  products,  Brahman  also  should  be  a 
product. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  unless  a  primary  material  cause  is  admitted, 
it  will  all  end  in  an  infinite  regress.  And  whatever  is  understood 
to  be  the  primary  cause  will  itself  be  our  Brahman.  Hence  there 
is  no  possibility  of  conflict.18 

Topic  4:  Origin  of  Fire 

^T:  Fire  ara:  from  this  one,  fjj  because  3ffi|  (it)  says  cTCT  so. 

10.  Fire  originates  from  this  one  (i.e.  air);  for  the  Upanifad 
says  so. 

Opponent :  In  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad,  fire  is  spoken  of  as 
originating  from  Existence  (VI.  ii.  3),  whereas  in  the  Taittirlya 
Upani$ad  it  is  spoken  of  as  originating  from  air  (II.  i.  2).  Now 
then,  since  there  is  a  conflict  in  the  Upani$ads  about  the  source 
of  fire,  the  conclusion  drawn  is  that  fire  has  Brahman  as  its 
source. 

Why? 

iaOr  “the  ordainer  of  the  ordainers  of  the  sense-organs”  according  to  a 
different  reading. 

ia  Unless  some  cause  is  admitted,  chance  will  have  full  sway.  Unless  a 
beginningless  cause  is  accepted  the  door  will  be  opened  for  infinite 
regress.  To  accept  a  cause  without  a  beginning  will  lead  to  our  belief  in 
Brahman,  for  all  such  causes  as  primordial  Nature  were  negated  earlier. 


462 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.  iii.  10 


Because  the  introduction  is  made  with,  “In  the  beginning  it 
was  Existence  alone”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  and  then  it  is  said,  “That 
created  fire”  (ibid.);  because  the  declaration  about  “everything 
becoming  known  through  the  knowledge  of  one”  becomes  pos¬ 
sible  if  everything  originates  from  Brahman;  also  because  there 
is  the  general  text,  “Everything  originates  from  That,  rests  in 
That,  and  merges  in  That”  (Ch.  III.  xiv);  and  lastly  because  in 
another  Upanisad  the  introduction  is  made  with,  “From  this 
arises  vital  force”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3),  and  then  it  is  shown  that  every¬ 
thing  without  exception  is  born  of  Brahman.14  In  the  Taittiriya 
(Upanisad)  also  we  come  across  the  text,  “Having  practised 
tapas  (concentrated  deliberation),  He  created  all  that  there  is” 
(III.  vi.  1),  where  an  all-comprehensive  statement  is  made. 
Accordingly,  the  statement,  “From  air  came  fire”  (Tai.  II.  i.  2), 
is  made  from  the  standpoint  of  subsequent  occurrence,  meaning 
thereby  that  fire  originated  (from  Brahman)  after  air. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  answer  is  offered  that 
fire  comes  out  from  this  air. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

For  that  is  how  the  Upani§ad  says,  “From  air  came  fire”.  If 
fire  had  directly  originated  from  Brahman  without  any  inter¬ 
mediary,  and  if  it  had  not  come  out  of  air,  the  text,  “From  air 
came  fire”,  would  be  falsified. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  this  text  would  mean  a  subse¬ 
quent  occurrence? 

Vedantin :  We  say,  not  so.  For  in  the  earlier  text,  “From  that 
Self,  that  is  such,  was  born  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  the  word 
(dtmanah — from  the)  Self,  occurring  as  the  ablative  (i.e.  source) 
of  the  verb  “to  be  born”  has  the  fifth  case-ending  (“from”).  In 
the  text  under  discussion  as  well  that  topic  of  “being  born” 
holds  the  field.  Again,  in  the  subsequent  text,  “From  earth  were 
born  herbs”  (Tai.  II.  i.  3),  where  also  origination  holds  sway,  we 
come  across  the  fifth  case-ending  in  the  ablative  sense.  Hence  it 
is  understood  that  in  the  text,  “From  air  came  fire”,  the  fifth 
case-ending  that  occurs  (after  air,  “from  air”)  is  used  in  the 

14  “From  this  is  born  vital  force,  mind,  and  all  the  senses,  and  space,  air, 
fire,  water,  and  the  earth  that  supports  all.” 


II.iii.10]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHAgYA  463 

ablative  sense  (meaning  “fire  was  born  from  air”).  Moreover,  to 
arrive  at  the  meaning,  “After  air  was  born  fire”,  you  have  to 
fancy  the  association  (of  the  verb)  with  some  word  (e.g. 
“ urdhvam — after”)  as  prefixed  to  it;  whereas  the  sense  (of 
“origination  from”)  conveyed  by  the  (fifth)  case-ending  in, 
“Fire  was  born  from  air”,  is  already  a  patent  fact.  (And  a 
patent  fact  is  more  powerful  than  what  can  be  inferentially  read 
into  a  passage).  Hence  this  text  conveys  the  idea  of  the  origina¬ 
tion  of  fire  from  air. 

Opponent :  Does  not  the  other  text,  “That  created  fire”  (Ch. 
VI.  ii.  3),  also  convey  the  idea  of  the  origin  of  fire  from 
Brahman? 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  it  does  not  involve  any  contradiction  even 
if  that  text  should  imply  the  birth  (ultimately  from  Brahman) 
in  an  order  of  succession.  If  it  is  conceived  that  after  creating 
space  and  air  (successively),  Brahman,  who  had  assumed  the 
form  of  air,  (next)  produced  fire,  even  then  it  will  involve  no 
contradiction  to  have  Brahman  as  its  (ultimate)  origin.  This  is 
just  like  saying,  “Her  (i.e.  cow’s)  hot  milk,  her  curd,  her  cheese” 
etc.  And  in  the  text,  “He  formed  Himself  into  the  world  by 
Himself”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1),  the  Upanisad  shows  how  Brahman 
exists  in  Its  own  modifications  as  their  Self.  Moreover,  we  come 
across  this  Smrti  text  from  the  Lord  (Sri  Krsna),  starting  with, 
“Intelligence,  knowledge,  non-delusion”  (Gita,  X.  4),  and  ending 
with,  “The  diverse  characteristics  of  the  creatures  originate  from 
Me  alone”  (Gita,  X.  5).  For  although  it  is  known  that  intelli¬ 
gence  etc.  are  born  directly  from  their  respective  causes,  still  all 
these  multitude  of  entities  are  derived  either  directly  or  indirectly 
(immediately  or  mediately)  from  God.  Thus  are  also  explained 
the  Vedic  texts  that  do  not  mention  any  order  of  creation,  for 
they  can  be  interpreted  logically  as  speaking  of  the  origin  from 
Brahman  alone  in  every  way  (be  it  mediately  or  immediately); 
but  the  texts  mentioning  .an  order  cannot  be  interpreted  in  any 
other  way  (without  the  help  of  an  order  of  creation).  The 
declaration  (of  all  things  being  known  from  the  knowledge  of 
one)  also  has  reference  only  to  the  derivation  of  all  from 
Existence,  and  not  to  any  direct  origination.  Thus,  there  is  no 
contradiction. 


464  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  11 

Topic  5:  Origin  of  Water 

11.  Water  (was  bom  from  this  fire). 

Water  “was  bom  from  this  fire,  for  the  Upani$ad  says  so” — 
this  much  has  to  be  supplied  at  the  end  of  “Water  is  born  from 
this  fire.” 

How  is  this  known? 

For  so  says  the  Upani$ad,  “That  (Existence  Brahman)  created 
water”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3).  And  in  the  face  of  the  text,  “from  fire 
came  water”  (Tai.  II.  i.  2),  there  is  no  place  for  doubt.  Having 
explained  the  origin  of  fire  and  being  about  to  explain  that  of 
earth,  the  aphorist  thinks,  “I  shall  insert  water  in  between  the 
two,  so  that  it  may  not  be  left  out”;  hence  he  frames  the 
aphorism  “water”. 


Topic  6:  Origin  of  Earth 


(Anna — food  means)  earth  on 

the  strength  of  the  subject-matter,  colour,  and  other  Vedic 
texts. 

12.  (The  word  “food”  means)  earth  on  the  strength  of  the 
topic ,  colour y  and  other  Vedic  texts. 

Doubt :  We  come  across  the  text,  “That  water  deliberated, 
‘Let  me  be  many,  let  me  be  bom\  That  water  created  food” 
(Ch.  VI.  ii.  4).  With  regard  to  this  the  doubt  arises:  “Are 
paddy,  barley,  etc.  (i.e.  com)  meant  here  by  the  word  food, 
or  is  it  some  eatable  (cooked)  food  like  rice  (i.e.  articles  of 
food),  or  is  it  earth?” 

Opponent :  Among  these,  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  that 
the  term  food  means  either  paddy,  barley,  etc.  or  cooked  rice 
etc.,  for  the  word  food  is  commonly  used  in  these  senses.  Besides, 
this  complementary  portion  of  the  Upani§adic  passage  confirms 


II.  iii.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  465 

this  view:  “Therefore  food  grows  plentifully  whenever  there  is 
rainfall”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  4).  For  only  paddy,  barley,  etc.,  and  not 
earth,  grow  abundantly  when  there  is  a  rainfall. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  reply:  It  is  earth  itself 
that  is  intended  to  be  conveyed  by  the  word  food  mentioned  as 
growing  out  of  water. 

On  what  grounds? 

“On  the  strength  of  the  topic,  the  colour,  and  other  Vedic 
texts.”  As  for  the  topic,  it  is  seen  that  the  text,  “That  created 
fire,  That  created  water”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  relates  to  the  great 
elements.  That  being  the  case,  it  is  not  proper  to  slap  over  the 
creation  of  earth  that  follows  in  order,  and  jump  suddenly  to 
paddy,  barley,  etc.  Similarly  the  colour  mentioned  in  the  com¬ 
plementary  portion  of  the  text  also  conforms  to  that  of  earth: 
“That  which  is  the  dark  (or  gray)  colour,  belongs  to  food” 
(Ch.  VI.  iv.  1-4).  For  articles  of  food  like  rice  etc.  do  not 
invariably  have  the  dark  colour,  nor  do  paddy  etc.  have  it. 

Opponent :  Not  even  earth  is  invariably  dark  in  colour.  For 
fields  are  seen  to  be  whitish  like  milk  and  reddish  like  burning 
charcoal. 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect.  The  colour  is  mentioned  from 
the  point  of  view  of  frequency  (preponderance).  Earth  is  most 
generally  dark  (grey)  in  colour,  but  not  either  white  or  red. 
The  writers  of  Puraija  (Pauranikas)  also  speak  of  night  as  the 
shadow  of  the  earth.  And  night  is  darkish;  therefore  it  is 
appropriately  understood  that  the  earth’s  colour  is  dark.  More¬ 
over,  another  Vedic  text,  dealing  with  the  same  topic,  says, 
“Earth  came  from  water”  (Tai.  II.  i.  2).  There  is  also  the  text, 
“What  was  there  like  scum  on  the  water  was  solidified  and 
became  this  earth”  (Bj\  I.  ii.  2).  But  paddy  etc.  are  shown  as 
growing  out  of  earth,  as  in,  “From  the  earth  grow  the  herbs, 
and  from  the  herbs  food”  (Tai.  II.  i.  2).  Thus  in  the  face  of 
the  topic  etc.  which  set  forth  earth,  how  can  paddy  etc.  be 
understood  (from  anna — food)?  Even  the  fact  of  that  being  the 
usual  meaning  (of  the  word  anna)  is  ruled  out  by  the  topic  etc. 
And  it  is  to  be  understood  that  when  the  complementary  por¬ 
tion  of  the  passage  mentions  that  food  is  produced  from  earth, 
it  merely  indicates  thereby  that  it  is  earth  that  grew  out  of 
30 


4 <56  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iu.  12 

water.  Accordingly,  it  is  earth  that  is  expressed  here  by  the 
word  “food”. 

Topic  7:  Creation  from  God’s  Deliberation 

cWfasTR&C  ^  df^TlcS:  ll^ll 

^  But  from  profound  meditation  on  that  *r: 

He  tTcf  only  (created)  (as  is  known)  from  His 

indicatory  marks. 

13.  It  is  He  only ,  who  through  profound  meditation  on  each 
thing  ( created  it),  as  is  known  from  His  indicatory  marks . 

Doubt :  Do  these  elements,  space  and  the  rest,  create  their 
own  products  by  themselves  or  is  it  God,  existing  as  the  Self 
of  these  elements,  who  produces  the  effects  through  His  pro¬ 
found  meditation? 

Opponent :  Faced  with  this  doubt,  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived 
at  is  that  the  elements  themselves  create. 

Why? 

For  in  such  texts  as  “From  space  came  air,  from  air  fire” 
(Tai.  II.  i.  1)  we  hear  of  their  independence. 

Objection :  Is  not  independent  action  denied  in  the  case  of 
the  insentient  things? 

Opponent :  That  is  nothing  damaging.  For  we  hear  of  the 
sentience  of  the  elements  as  well,  in  such  texts  as,  “That  fire 
deliberated,  that  water  deliberated”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  4). 

Veddntin :  As  against  such  a  position,  it  is  said:  It  is  God 
Himself,  abiding  in  these  elements  as  their  Self,  that  creates 
every  effect  through  profound  meditation. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

Because  of  His  indicatory  marks.  For  example,  the  scriptural 
statement,  “He  who  inhabits  the  earth  but  is  within  it,  whom 
the  earth  does  not  know,  whose  body  is  the  earth,  and  who 
controls  the  earth  from  within  (is  the  Internal  Ruler,  your  own 
immortal  Self)”  (Bj\  III.  vii.  3),  and  other  texts  of  the  same  class 
show  that  the  elements  have  activity  only  when  they  are  pre¬ 
sided  over  by  someone  else.  So  also,  starting  with,  “He  decided, 


II.  iii.  14] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


467 


let  me  become  many,  let  me  be  bom”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1),  it  is  stated 
in,  “He  became  the  gross  and  the  fine.  He  created  Himself  by 
Himself”  (ibid.),  that  He  Himself  is  the  Self  of  all.  As  for  the 
mention  of  seeing  (i.e.  deliberation)  by  water  and  fire,  that  is 
to  be  understood  as  owing  only  to  the  controlling  presence  of 
God;  for  the  text,  “There  is  no  other  witness  but  Him”  (Br. 
III.  vii.  23)  denies  the  existence  of  any  other  seer.  Moreover,  in 
the  text,  “He  deliberated,  let  me  be  many,  let  me  be  born” 
(Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  it  is  the  witnessing  Existence  (Brahman)  that 
forms  the  topic. 

Topic  8:  Reverse  Order  of  Dissolution 

^  n*vii 

g  But  anr:  as  compared  with  this  (order  of  creation)  spin 
the  order  (of  dissolution)  proceeds  in  the  reverse  way, 

^  and  OTqsfl  (this)  is  logical. 

14.  But  as  compared  with  this  order  of  creation ,  the  order  of 
dissolution  proceeds  in  a  reverse  way.  This  is  logical  too. 

Doubt :  The  order  of  creation  of  the  elements  has  been 
considered.  After  that  the  order  of  dissolution  is  being  consid¬ 
ered  now,  as  to  whether  the  dissolution  comes  about  without 
any  order,  or  it  follows  the  order  of  creation,  or  it  occurs  in 
the  reverse  way.  In  the  Upani^ads  we  hear  of  all  the  three — the 
creation,  continuance,  and  dissolution  of  the  elements — as 
dependent  on  Brahman,  as  in,  “That  from  which  these  elements 
emerge,  that  by  which  they  are  sustained  after  being  born,  and 
that  towards  which  they  proceed  and  into  which  they  merge” 
(Tai.  III.  i.  1). 

Opponent :  Now  then,  with  regard  to  this,  the  conclusion 
is  that  there  is  no  set  order,  as  no  specification  is  made;  or  if 
anyone  should  search  for  an  order  after  hearing  of  a  sequence 
stated  in  the  Upani$ads  with  regard  to  creation,  then  dissolution 
too  may  have  the  same  sequence.  This  is  what  it  comes  to. 

Vedantin :  Hence  we  say:  As  compared  with  this  order  of 
creation,  dissolution  ought  to  have  a  reverse  order.  For  the 


468  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.iii.14 

common  experience  is  that  the  order  in  which  a  man  ascends  a 
staircase,  is  reversed  when  he  comes  down.  Besides,  it  is  seen 
that  pots,  plates,  etc.,  which  originate  from  earth,  are  reduced 
to  earth  again  when  they  disintegrate;  and  ice,  hail,  etc.  formed 
from  water  return  to  water.  Hence  also  this  is  logical  that  earth 
which  originates  from  water,  should  at  the  end  of  its  period  of 
continuance  as  earth,  return  to  water;  and  water  which  is  born 
out  of  fire,  should  merge  in  fire.  It  is  also  to  be  understood  that 
the  whole  creation  enters  thus  in  this  order  successively  into  the 
finer  and  finer  causes,  and  ultimately  merges  into  Brahman 
which  is  the  supreme  cause  and  the  acme  of  fineness.  For  it  is 
not  proper  that  a  product  should  merge  into  the  cause  of  its 
cause  by  skipping  over  its  own  cause.  In  the  various  places  in 
the  Smrti  also,  dissolution  is  shown  as  occurring  in  the  order 
opposite  to  that  in  which  creation  occurs,  as  for  instance  in 
such  texts  as,  “The  end  of  the  world  comes  about  thus,  O  divine 
saint:  Earth,  the  basis  of  this  world,  is  dissolved  in  water;  water 
dissolves  in  fire;  fire  gets  absorbed  in  air;  (air  dissolves  in  space, 
and  space  in  the  Unmanifested)”(Mbh.XII.339.  29).  The  order  of 
creation  is  mentioned  in  connection  with  dissolution.  Moreover, 
that  order  is  not  expected  in  the  case  of  dissolution,  it  being 
irrelevant  there;  because  so  long  as  the  effect  persists,  the  cause 
cannot  logically  dissolve,  for  when  the  cause  gets  dissolved,  the 
effect  cannot  continue;  but  it  is  quite  logical  that  the  cause  can 
persist  even  after  the  dissolution  of  the  effect;  for  this  is  what  is 
observed  in  the  case  of  clay  etc. 

Topic  9:  The  Origin  of  Mind  and  Intellect 

Intellect  and  mind  (must  find  a  place  somewhere) 
3RTCT  in  between  spifa-  in  sequence  owing  to  indi¬ 

catory  marks  of  their  existence  5%  ifcj  if  such  be  the  view, 
q*  not  so  for  that  creates  no  difference. 

IS.  If  it  be  contended  that  the  intellect  and  mind  must  find 
accomr'odation  in  some  order  in  some  intermediate  stage , 


II.  iii.  15]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  469 

because  indicatory  marks  of  their  existence  are  in  evidence ,  then 
not  soy  because  their  presence  creates  no  difference  (i.e.  does 
not  disturb  the  order  of  creation  or  dissolution). 

Opponent :  It  has  been  stated  that  the  creation  and  dissolution 
occur  in  the  direct  and  reverse  orders  respectively.  It  has  also 
been  stated  that  creation  starts  from  the  Self  and  dissolution 
ends  in  the  Self.  Now  in  the  Smftis  and  Vedas  the  existence  of 
mind  together  with  the  senses,  as  also  of  the  intellect,  is  a  well- 
known  fact,  as  is  evident  from  such  indicatory  marks  in  the 
texts  as,  “Know  the  intellect  to  be  the  charioteer,  and  the  mind 
to  be  the  rein.  They  say  that  the  senses  are  the  horses”  (Ka. 
I.  iii.  3).  Their  creation  and  dissolution  in  an  orderly  way  must 
also  be  placed  within  some  intermediate  stage,  for  all  things  are 
claimed  to  have  originated  from  Brahman.  Moreover,  in  the 
Upani$ad  of  the  Atharva  Veda,  under  the  topic  dealing  with 
creation,  the  senses  are  enumerated  in  between  the  Self  and  the 
elements  in,  “From  this  (Self)  are  born  the  vital  force,  mind, 
all  the  senses,  space,  air,  fire,  and  the  earth  that  supports  all” 
(Mu.  II.  i.  3).  As  a  result,  the  order  of  creation  and  dissolution 
of  the  elements,  stated  earlier,  will  be  disturbed. 

Vedantin  :  No,  for  no  difference  or  disturbance  is  involved, 
because  if  the  senses  have  come  out  of  the  elements,  then  their 
creation  and  dissolution  follow  as  a  matter  of  course  from  the 
creation  and  dissolution  of  the  elements,  and  so  no  other  order 
need  be  searched  for  these.  And  signs  are  in  evidence  to  show 
that  the  senses  are  formed  of  the  elements,  as  for  instance  in,  “O 
amiable  one,  the  mind  is  formed  of  food,  the  vital  force  is 
formed  of  water,  and  speech  is  formed  of  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  v.  4), 
and  so  on.  The  separate  mention  of  the  elements  and  senses  at 
some  places  is  to  be  construed  according  to  the  maxim  of  the 
Brahmana  and  mendicant.15  Again,  even  if  the  senses  are  not 
the  products  of  the  elements,  still  the  order  of  creation  of  the 
elements  is  not  disturbed  by  the  senses,  for  the  position  then 
can  be  cither  that  the  senses  originate  first  and  the  elements 

15Brahmanas  alone  can  be  mendicants.  So  when  somebody  says 
“Brahmanas  and  mendicants”,  he  means  by  the  word  Brahmana  those  that 
are  not  mendicants.  So  “elements”  are  those  that  have  not  become  “senses”. 


470 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[Il.iii.  15 


later,  or  that  the  elements  come  out  first  and  the  senses  later. 
What  is  done  in  the  Upani$ad  of  the  Atharva  Veda  is  a  mere 
enumeration  of  the  senses  and  elements  one  by  one,  but  no  order 
of  creation  is  mentioned.16  Similarly  at  another  place  the  order 
of  the  origin  of  the  senses  is  mentioned  separately  from  (i.e. 
independently  of)  that  of  the  elements:  “In  the  beginning,  all 
this  (universe)  was  but  Prajapati  (Hiranyagarbha).  He  medi¬ 
tated  on  Himself.  He  created  the  mind.  Then  the  mind  alone 
existed  (and  not  all  this).  He  thought  of  Himself.  He  created 
the  organ  of  speech.”17  Hence  the  order  of  the  creation  of 
elements  is  not  disturbed  thereby. 

Topic  10:  Birth  and  Death 

\\\%\\ 

g  But  the  mention  of  these  (birth  and  death) 

CTItJ  must  be  ^-3T^-oznP5Fl:  in  relation  to  the  moving  and 
the  motionless;  (with  regard  to  the  soul  it  is)  used  in  a 

secondary  sense,  being  applicable  when  that 

(body)  exists. 

16.  The  mention  of  birth  and  death  must  be  in  the  primary 
sense  in  relation  to  the  moving  and  the  motionless;  in  relation 
to  the  soul  it  must  be  in  a  secondary  sense ,  the  application  ( of 
such  words)  being  possible  when  a  body  is  present. 

Somebody  may  have  the  misconception  that  even  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  has  origination  and  dissolution,  since  there  are  such 
references  in  the  human  world  as,  “Devadatta  is  born,  Deva- 
datta  is  dead”,  and  because  purificatory  rites  like  those  follow¬ 
ing  on  birth  are  enjoined. 

Vedantin  :  We  remove  that  misconception.  In  order  that  the 
scriptural  mention  of  the  association  of  the  individual  person 
with  the  results  of  his  work  may  stand  justified,  the  individual 

16  In  enumeration,  things  have  to  be  told  off  one  after  the  other.  That 
sequence  does  not  represent  any  definite  order. 

17  The  five  fine  elements  constitute  the  body  of  Hiranyagarbha.  So  they 
exist  earlier;  the  senses  come  later  from  Hiranyagarbha. 


II.  iii.  16]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  471 

soul  can  have  no  origin  or  dissolution.  Were  the  individual  soul 
destroyed  along  with  the  body,  the  injunctions  and  prohibitions, 
meant  for  the  acquisition  of  desirable  results  and  avoidance  of 
undesirable  results  in  another  body,  would  become  useless.  The 
Upanisad  also  declares,  “It  is  this  body  that  dies  when  it  is  left 
by  the  soul,  but  the  soul  does  not  die”  (Ch.  VI.  xi.  3). 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  point  out  that  the  terms  birth  and 
death  are  used  about  the  soul  in  common  talk? 

Vedantin :  True  it  was  pointed  out,  but  this  reference  to  the 
birth  and  death  of  the  soul  is  only  in  a  secondary  sense. 

Opponent :  In  relation  to  what,  again,  are  the  terms  birth  and 
death  used  in  the  primary  sense,  in  contrast  with  which  this 
can  be  secondary? 

Vedantin :  The  reply  is  that  “the  primary  use  of  the  two 
words  is  concerned  with  both  the  moving  and  the  stationary” — 
the  words  birth  and  death  have  reference  to  the  bodies  of  the 
moving  and  motionless  entities.  The  entities — both  moving  and 
non-moving  are  born  and  they  die.  So  while  the  words  birth 
and  death  have  those  in  view  in  the  primary  senses,  they  are 
used  figuratively  with  regard  to  the  individual  souls  inhabiting 
them,  for  uthe  application  of  the  terms  birth  and  death  is 
contingent  on  the  presence  of  the  bodies”  (which  are  the  limit¬ 
ing  adjuncts  of  the  souls).  The  words  birth  and  death  are  used 
when  there  are  manifestation  and  disappearance  of  the  body, 
but  not  otherwise.  For  no  one  notices  the  soul  to  be  bom  or 
to  be  dead  unless  it  be  in  association  with  the  body.  The  text, 
“That  man  (individual  soul),  when  he  is  bom  or  attains  a  body, 
is  connected  with  evils  (i.e.  the  body  and  organs);  and  when 
he  dies  or  leaves  the  body,  (he  discards  these  evils)”  (Bj.  IV. 
iii.  8),  shows  that  the  words  birth  and  death  are  used  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  association  with  or  dissociation  from  the 
body.  And  the  rule  pertaining  to  the  performance  of  rites  con¬ 
nected  with  birth  etc.  is  also  to  be  understood  as  related  to  the 
emergence  of  the  body,  for  there  can  be  no  emergence  of  the 
soul.  In  the  next  aphorism  will  be  discussed  whether  or  not  the 
soul  originates  like  space  etc.  from  the  supreme  Self.  But  in  the 
present  aphorism  it  is  explained  that  the  terms  origin  and  dissolu- 


472  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  16 

tion  (birth  and  death)  in  the  (popular)  gross  sense  apply  to  the 
body,  but  they  do  not  apply  to  the  individual  soul. 

Topic  11:  Origin  of  the  Soul 


ll^ll 


3TRHF  The  soul  is  not  (born)  3T«r^:  because  this  is  not 
heard  of  (in  the  Upani$ads);  foetid  because  of  eternality 
as  known  from  them;  ^  and. 


11.  The  individual  soul  has  no  origin;  because  the  U pan  if  ads 
do  not  mention  thisy  because  its  eternality  is  known  from  them , 
and  (because  of  other  reasons). 

Doubt :  That  the  soul,  called  jiva  (living  one),  presiding  over 
this  cage  of  the  body  and  senses,  and  becoming  associated  with 
the  fruits  of  work,  does  exist  is  without  doubt.  But  a  doubt 
arises,  from  the  conflict  among  the  Vedic  texts,  as  to  whether 
the  soul  originates  from  Brahman  like  space  and  the  rest,  or  it 
does  not  originate  like  Brahman  Itself.  For  in  some  texts  the 
origin  of  the  living  beings  from  the  supreme  Brahman  is  spoken 
of  with  the  help  of  the  illustrations  like  sparks  (flying  from 
fire),  whereas  in  some  texts  it  is  declared  that  without  under¬ 
going  any  modification  Brahman  enters  the  body  to  assume  the 
state  of  a  living  being;  but  no  origination  is  affirmed. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  conclusion  arrived  at  is  that  the 
soul  does  originate. 

Why  so? 

So  as  not  to  override  the  (scriptural)  declaration.  The  asser¬ 
tion  that  “everything  becomes  known  when  one  is  known”  will 
remain  unaffected  if  all  things  (including  the  soul)  originate 
from  Brahman,  whereas  this  assertion  will  be  adversely  affected 
if  the  individual  soul  be  an  independent  entity.  And  it  cannot 
be  understood  that  the  unmodified  supreme  Self  Itself  is  the 
individual  soul,  for  their  characteristics  differ.  The  supreme  Self 
has  such  attributes  as  being  free  from  sin  etc.,  whereas  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul  is  the  opposite  of  that.  And  that  the  latter  is  an 
effect  (of  Brahman)  becomes  established  from  the  fact  of  its 


II.  iii.  17] 


BRAHMA  -SCTRA  -BHA§YA 


473 


delimitation.  All  that  is  delimited,  counting  from  space  down¬ 
ward,  is  a  product.  Besides,  the  origination  of  everything  count¬ 
ing  from  space  is  already  known.  Since  the  individual  soul 
undertakes  pious  and  impious  works,  since  it  is  subject  to 
happiness  and  sorrow,  and  since  it  is  separate  in  each  body, 
therefore  it  too  must  have  originated  in  the  course  of  the 
emergence  of  this  entire  creation.  Moreover,  in  the  passage,  “As 
from  a  fire  tiny  sparks  fly  in  all  directions,  so  from  this  Self 
emanate  all  organs”  (Bj\  II.  i.  20),  the  scripture  first  gives 
instruction  about  the  creation  of  the  organs  etc.,  constituting 
the  set  of  objects  to  be  experienced,  and  then  imparts  instruction 
about  the  separate  creation  of  the  experiencing  souls  in  the 
passage,  “all  these  souls  emanate”18  (Br.  II.  i.  20).  The  origin 
and  dissolution  of  the  individual  souls  are  also  spoken  of  in, 
“As  from  a  blazing  fire  emanate  a  thousand  sparks  of  the  same 
nature  as  fire,  similarly  from  the  Immutable,  O  amiable  one,  are 
born  different  classes  of  creatures,  and  they  merge  there  itself” 
(Mu.  II.  i.  1).  From  the  phrase  “of  the  same  nature”  it  follows 
that  the  individual  souls  are  similar  to  the  supreme  Self, 
for  they  have  the  gift  of  consciousness.  An  omission  in  men¬ 
tioning  (something)  somewhere  cannot  override  the  mention 
(of  it)  elsewhere.  For  everything  mentioned  (afresh)  in  other 
texts  has  to  be  taken  as  implied  everywhere  if  it  is  not  contra¬ 
dictory  and  if  it  supplies  an  additional  idea.  Under  the  circum¬ 
stances,  the  texts  about  the  entry  (of  God  into  the  bodies  and 
creation)  are  also  to  be  explained  as  meaning  such  entry  by 
assuming  a  modified  state,  as  it  is  done  in  the  case  of  the  text, 
“He  made  Himself  by  Himself”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1).  Therefore  the 
individual  soul  has  an  origin. 

Vedmtin :  To  this  we  say,  the  soul,  that  is  to  say,  “an  individ¬ 
ual  living  being”,  “has  no  origin”. 

Why? 

“Because  the  Upanisads  do  not  mention  this”.  In  most  of  the 
places  dealing  with  creation,  the  individual  soul  is  not  men¬ 
tioned. 


18  This  is  the  Madhyandina  reading.  The  Kanva  reading  is,  “all  gods 
and  all  beings  emanate”. 


474  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  17 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  say  that  an  absence  of  mention  some¬ 
where  cannot  overrule  the  mention  made  elsewhere? 

Vedantin :  True,  you  said  so.  But  we  say  that  the  very  origin 
is  impossible  for  it. 

Why? 

“Because  its  eternality  is  known  from  them  (i.e.  the  texts), 
and  (because  of  other  reasons)”.  By  the  word  “and”  is  to  be 
understood,  “and  because  its  birthlessness  etc.  (follow  from 
those  texts)”.  For  its  eternality  is  understood  from  the  Vedic 
texts,  and  so  also  it  is  understood  that  it  is  birthless  and  change¬ 
less,  that  it  is  the  unchanging  Brahman  Itself  existing  as  the  Self 
of  the  individual  living  being,  and  that  the  soul  is  one  with 
Brahman.  Any  origination  for  a  soul  of  this  kind  can  never  be 
logically  possible. 

Opponent:  Which  are  those  Vedic  texts? 

Vedantin :  “The  individual  being  does  not  die”  (Ch.  VI.  xi. 
3),  “That  birthless  Self  is  undecaying,  immortal,  undying,  fear¬ 
less,  and  Brahman  (infinite)”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  25),  “The  Intelligent 
one  is  not  bom  and  does  not  die.  This  ancient  one  is  birthless, 
eternal,  unchanging”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  18),  “Having  created  that,  He 
entered  into  that”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1),  “Let  me  manifest  name  and 
form  by  Myself  entering  as  the  individual  soul”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2), 
“This  Self  has  entered  into  (i.e.  permeates)  those  bodies  up  to 
the  tips  of  the  nails”  (Bjr.  I.  iv.  7),  “Thou  art  That”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7),  “I  am  Brahman”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  10),  “This  Self,  the  perceiver 
of  everything,  is  Brahman”  (Bf.  II.  v.  19).  These  and  such  other 
texts  which  stand  there  to  declare  eternality  etc.  override  the 
possibility  of  the  origin  of  the  individual  soul. 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  said  that  anything  that  is  delimited  is 
subject  to  change,  and  anything  having  change  has  origination? 

Vedantin :  As  to  that,  this  is  the  answer:  The  delimitation 
does  not  belong  to  it  naturally,  for  the  Vedic  text  says,  “The 
one  deity  remains  hidden  in  all  creatures;  He  is  all-pervasive  and 
the  inmost  Self  of  all  creatures”  (Sv.  VI.  11).  Just  as  space  seems 
to  be  divided  owing  to  the  presence  of  pots  etc.,  so  also  the 
appearance  of  division  occurs  in  Brahman  owing  to  the  presence 
of  limiting  adjuncts  like  the  intellect  etc.  To  this  effect  are  the 
texts:  “The  Self  is  indeed  Brahman,  as  well  as  identified  with  the 


II.  iii.  17] '  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  475 

intellect,  the  mrnas  (mind),  and  the  vital  force,  with  the  eyes 
and  ears”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  5),  etc.,  which  show  that  the  individual 
soul,  though  always  the  same  and  one  with  Brahman  Itself  that 
has  no  change  and  is  one  without  a  second,  still  appears  to  be 
identified  with  diverse  things  like  the  intellect  etc.  The  identity 
with  the  intellect  etc.  is  to  be  understood  to  consist  in  appearing 
as  though  coloured  by  these  adjuncts  owing  to  a  non-manifesta¬ 
tion  of  the  pure  nature  of  the  Self,  as  it  occurs  for  instance  in 
such  cases  as,  “That  voluptuous  rogue  is  all  sex”.19  As  for  the 
Vedic  mention  of  the  birth  of  the  individual  soul  at  some  rare 
places,  that  too  is  to  be  interpreted,  for  this  very  reason,  as 
caused  by  its  contact  with  the  limiting  adjuncts.  It  originates 
with  the  origin  of  the  limiting  adjuncts  and  dies  with  their 
death.  This  is  shown  in,  “The  Self  is  pure  intelligence  alone;  it 
comes  out  (as  a  separate  entity)  from  these  elements  (forming 
the  body)  and  is  destroyed  with  them.  After  this  death,  it  has 
no  more  (particular)  consciousness”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  13).  Similarly 
this  very  fact,  viz  the  destruction  of  the  limiting  adjunct  alone 
and  not  of  the  Self,  is  proved  in  this  very  context  by  raising  the 
question,  “Just  here  you  have  led  me  into  the  midst  of  a  con¬ 
fusion,  sir;  I  do  not  at  all  comprehend  this”  (that  after  death 
the  soul  has  no  consciousness),  and  then  offering  the  answer  to 
this  thus,  “Certainly  I  am  not  saying  anything  confusing,  my 
dear.  This  Self  is  indeed  immutable  and  indestructible.  But  it 
becomes  dissociated  from  objects”  (Br.  IV.  v.  14).  And  thus 
there  is  no  overriding  of  the  declaration,  inasmuch  as  it  is  admit¬ 
ted  that  the  changeless  Brahman  Itself  appears  as  the  individual 
soul.  The  difference  in  the  characteristics  of  the  two  is  also 
created  by  the  presence  of  limiting  adjuncts,  for  in  the  passage, 
“Please  instruct  me  further  about  liberation”  etc.  (Bj\  IV.  iii. 
14-16,  33),  where  the  very  soul,  which  remains  identified  with 
the  intellect  and  forms  the  topic  of  the  discussion,  is  shown 
to  be  one  with  the  supreme  Self  through  a  process  of  denial 
of  all  worldly  attributes.  Accordingly,  the  soul  never  has  any 
origin  or  dissolution. 

19  The  Sanskrit  word  is  strimaya,  where  the  suffix  may  at  is  used  in  the 
sense  of  abundance,  the  man  being  almost  full  of,  i.e.  identified  with 
women  (sex).  Similarly  are  to  be  understood  vijnanamaya  etc. 


476 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 
Topic  12:  Eternally  Conscious  Soul 


[Il.iii.  18 


5TtS?f  IT^  lltmi 

*T:  (The  soul  is  an  eternal)  cognizer  a^r:  trar  for  this  very 
reason. 

IS.  The  soul  is  eternally  a  cognizer  for  this  very  reason  (of 
being  free  from  origin  and  dissolution). 

Doubt :  Schools  of  thought  are  not  agreed  as  to  whether  the 
soul  is  naturally  insentient  but  becomes  endowed  with  an  adven¬ 
titious  sentience  as  is  believed  by  the  followers  of  Kaijada,  or 
it  is  eternally  conscious  by  nature  as  the  Samkhyas  believe; 
therefore  a  doubt  arises.  What  is  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived 
at  then? 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  is  that  the  consciousness  of  the 
soul  is  adventitious,  arising  from  the  conjunction  of  the  soul 
and  the  mind,  like  redness  etc.  resulting  from  the  contact  of  fire 
and  a  pot  etc.  For  if  the  consciousness  be  eternal,  it  should  be  in 
evidence  even  in  the  cases  of  those  who  are  asleep,  have  fainted, 
or  are  possessed  by  supernatural  beings.  But  when  questioned 
(afterwards),  they  say,  “We  were  not  conscious  of  anything”; 
and  they  are  seen  to  have  consciousness  when  brought  back  to 
normalcy.  Thus  since  the  soul  is  possessed  of  impermanent 
(intermittent)  consciousness,  its  consciousness  is  adventitious. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  being  refuted:  “This 
soul  is  a  cognizer”,  it  is  endowed  with  eternal  consciousness, 
exactly  for  the  reason  already  adduced,  viz  that  it  has  no  origin, 
but  that  it  is  only  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself,  which  while 
remaining  immutable,  appears  to  exist  as  an  individual  soul 
owing  to  association  with  limiting  adjuncts.  That  the  supreme 
Brahman  is  eternal  consciousness  by  Its  very  nature  is  mentioned 
in  such  Vcdic  texts  as,  “Knowledge,  Bliss,  Brahman”  (Bj*.  III. 
ix.  28.7),  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1), 
“Without  interior  or  exterior,  entire,  and  pure  Intelligence 
alone”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  13),  etc.  Now  if  the  individual  soul  is  but 
the  supreme  Brahman  Itself,  then  it  can  be  understood  that  like 
fire  possessing  heat  and  light,  the  soul  is  also  possessed  of  eternal 


II.  iii.  18  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  477 

consciousness  by  its  very  nature.  Besides,  in  the  course  of  the 
topic  dealing  with  the  soul  identified  with  the  intellect  occur 
such  texts  as  the  following:  “Himself  awake,  watches  those 
(organs  of  speech  etc.)  that  are  asleep”  (Rr.  IV.  iii.  11),  “In 
this  (dream)  state,  the  man  himself  becomes  his  own  light  (i.e. 
self-effulgent)”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  9,  14),  “for  the  knower’s  function 
of  knowing  can  never  be  lost”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  30),  and  so  on. 
And  from  the  fact  that  there  is  a  continuity  of  know¬ 
ledge  through  the  medium  of  all  the  sense-organs,  such  as, 
“I  know  this,  I  know  this”,  it  can  be  concluded  on  the  authority 
of  the  text,  “And  he  who  knows,  ‘I  smell  this’,  is  the  Self”  (Ch. 
VIII.  xii.  4),  that  the  individual  soul  has  that  nature  (of  eternal 
consciousness).20 

Opponent :  If  the  soul  be  eternal  consciousness  by  its  very 
nature,  then  the  senses  of  smell  etc.  become  superfluous. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  the  senses  are  meant  for  perceiving  the 
particular  objects  of  smell  etc.  And  this  is  shown  by  saying, 
“The  sense  of  smell  is  meant  for  perceiving  smell”  (Ch.  VIII. 
xii.  4)  etc.  As  for  the  objection  that  the  people  in  sleep  etc.  have 
no  awareness,  that  is  answered  bv  the  Upanisad  itself  when  it 
says  with  regard  to  the  sleeping  man,  “That  (the  soul)  does  not 
see  in  that  state  is  because,  although  seeing  then,  it  does  not  see; 
for  the  vision  of  the  witness  can  never  be  lost,  because  it  is 
immortal.  But  (then)  no  second  thing  exists  there  separate  from 
it  which  it  can  see”  (B|\  IV.  iii.  23),  etc.  This  is  what  is  meant: 
This  appearance  of  absence  of  awareness  is  owing  to  the  absence 
of  objects  of  knowledge,  but  not  owing  to  the  absence 
of  consciousness.  It  is  like  the  non-manifestation  of  light,  spread 
over  space,  owing  to  the  absence  of  things  on  which  it  can  be 
reflected,  but  not  owing  to  its  own  absence.  And  the  arguments 
of  the  Vaisesikas  and  others  are  falsified  because  of  their  opposi¬ 
tion  to  Vedic  texts.  Hence  we  confirm  that  the  soul  is  eternal 
consciousness  by  its  very  nature. 


"The  sense-organs  change,  but  consciousness  continues  invariably.  This 
cannot  be  so  unless  there  is  a  soul  which  is  eternally  conscious. 


478 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 
Topic  13:  Soul’s  Dimensions 


[Il.iii.  19 


nun 

(There  is  mention)  of  departure  (from) 

(or  leaving  the  body),  going,  returning. 

19.  (The  individual  soul  must  be  atomic  in  dimension  owing 
to  the  mention  in  the  Vedas)  of  its  departure  from  the  bodyy 
going  (to  the  next  world  by  following  a  course)  y  and  coming 
back  (from  there). 

Doubt :  Now  is  being  considered  the  dimensions  of  the  indi¬ 
vidual  soul — whether  it  is  atomic,  or  of  an  intermediate  size,  or 
vast  (infinite). 

Objection :  Has  it  not  been  said  that  the  soul  has  no  origin 
and  that  it  is  eternal  consciousness?  From  this  it  follows  that 
the  individual  soul  is  none  other  than  the  supreme  Self;  and  it  is 
stated  in  the  scripture  that  the  supreme  Self  is  infinite.  So  how 
can  any  question  be  broached  about  the  dimensions  of  the  soul? 

Doubt:  This  is  truly  so.  But  the  Vedic  texts  about  the  soul’s 
leaving  (the  body),  its  movement  to  the  other  world,  and  return 
to  this  world  lead  to  a  limitation  in  dimensions.  Again,  the  Vedic 
texts  sometimes  speak  of  its  atomic  size  in  clear  words.  So  this 
discussion  has  to  be  started  for  resolving  these  conflicts. 

Opponent :  That  being  the  position,  the  conclusion  to  be 
derived  from  the  Vedic  texts  about  leaving  the  body,  going  to, 
and  coming  from  the  other  world  is  that  the  individual  soul  is 
limited  and  atomic  in  size.  Of  these  the  text  about  departure  is: 
“When  he  departs  from  this  body,  he  departs  together  with  all 
these”  (senses  etc.)  (Kau.  III.  3);  about  going  elsewhere:  “Those 
people  whoever  depart  from  this  world,  go  to  the  moon 
indeed”  (Kau.  I.  2);  and  about  coming:  “From  that  world  they 
return  to  this  world  for  (fresh)  work”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  6).  From  the 
Vedic  mention  of  their  death,  going  (i.e.  following  a  course), 
and  returning,  it  is  understood  that  the  individual  soul  is  limited; 
for  no  movement  can  be  imagined  for  one  that  is  infinite.  And 
limitation  being  accepted,  the  soul  must  be  atomic,  for  its 


II.  iii.21] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAgYA 


479 


correspondence  to  the  size  of  the  body  (i.e.  medium  size)  was 
discarded  in  the  course  of  examining  the  Jaina  view. 

i Ron 

^  And  ^T-3n^Tf  (the  relation)  with  one’s  own  soul 
of  the  latter  two. 

20.  (The  souVs  atomicity  stands  confirmed)  owing  to  the 
relation  of  one's  own  soul  with  the  latter  two  facts  (viz. 
following  of  a  course  and  coming  back). 

As  for  leaving  (or  giving  up),  it  may  sometimes  be  imagined 
as  occurring  to  the  unmoving  soul  through  a  cessation  of  its 
mastery  over  the  body  owing  to  exhaustion  of  results  of  work, 
just  like  the  cessation  of  one’s  ownership  over  a  village.  But  the 
latter  two — viz  going  elsewhere  and  coming  back — cannot 
happen  to  a  soul  that  does  not  move;  and  yet  their  relation  is 
with  the  soul  itself;  for  the  root  “ gam  (to  go)”  indicates  an 
action  inhering  in  the  agent.  Now,  since  the  soul  is  not  (admit¬ 
ted  to  be)  of  medium  dimension,  its  going  (by  following  a 
course),  and  coming  can  be  possible  only  if  it  be  atomic  in  size. 
And  going  and  coming  being  granted,  it  becomes  obvious  that 
(leaving  the  body  or)  death  also  is  a  moving  away  from  the 
body,  because  going  and  coming  are  not  possible  for  a  soul  that 
has  not  moved  out  of  the  body.  Again,  this  is  so,  because  partic¬ 
ular  parts  of  the  body  are  mentioned  as  the  places  of  departure, 
as  in,  “The  soul  departs  through  the  eye,  or  from  the  head  or 
from  other  parts  of  the  body”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  2).  There  are  also 
movements  of  the  soul  even  inside  the  body,  as  stated  in, 
“completely  withdrawing  these  particles  of  light,  he  comes  to 
the  heart”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  1),  “And  taking  the  shining  organs  with 
him,  he  comes  again  to  the  waking  state”  (Bj*.  IV.  iii.  11). 
Hence  also  is  proved  its  atomicity. 

dl«[<d^S  dvjd<lfw+Kld  |R?|| 

Not  3PT:  atomic  since  its  size  is  heard  of  as 

not  being  so  ffir  ^  if  this  be  the  objection,  q*  not  so, 
since  the  context  relates  to  the  other. 


480  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BH  A$YA  [II.iii.21 

21.  If  it  be  objected  that  the  soul  is  not  atomic  because  its 
size  is  heard  of  as  not  being  so,  we  reply,  no,  since  that  context 
relates  to  the  other  ( i.e.  the  supreme  Self). 

Objection :  Somebody  may,  however,  object  that  the  soul  is 
not  atomic. 

Why? 

Because  it  is  heard  of  in  the  Vedas  as  not  being  so,  that  is  to 
say,  because  its  size  is  heard  of  to  be  the  opposite  of  that  of  the 
atom.  For  the  texts  like  the  following  will  be  contradicted  if 
the  soul  be  atomic:  “That  Self  is  verily  great  and  birthless  thal 
remains  identified  with  the  intellect  and  in  the  midst  of  the 
organs”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22),  “And  it  is  all-pervasive  like  space  and 
eternal”,  “Brahman  is  Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinite”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1). 

Opponent :  That  creates  no  difficulty. 

How? 

Because  that  topic  is  about  the  other  (supreme  Self).  For  this 
other  kind  of  dimension  is  mentioned  only  in  a  context  dealing 
with  the  supreme  Self,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  supreme  Self  that  is 
(most  often)  presented  in  the  Upanisads  as  the  chief  reality  to 
be  known.  And  from  such  texts  as,  “The  Self  is  spotless,  beyond 
space”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  20),  it  is  known  that  the  supreme  Self  is  the 
special  subject-matter  of  those  texts. 

Objection :  In  the  passage,  “The  Self  that  remains  identified 
with  the  intellect  and  in  the  midst  of  the  organs”  (Br.  IV.  iv. 
22)  etc.,  it  is  the  embodied  soul  itself  that  is  indicated  as  posses¬ 
sed  of  vast  dimension  (in  the  sentence,  “That  Self  is  great  and 
birthlcss”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  22). 

Opponent :  But  this  mention  is  to  be  understood  as  made  from 
the  scriptural  point  of  view  as  in  the  case  Vamadeva  (B.  S. 
I.  i.  30).  Accordingly,  the  atomic  size  of  the  soul  is  not  con¬ 
tradicted,  since  the  mention  of  other  dimension  in  the  Vedas 
relates  to  the  conscious  (supreme)  Self. 

T ^TT^TT^  owing  to  direct  (Upani$adic  use  of  the) 
word  and  (mention  of)  infinitesimality  ^  as  well. 


II.iii.23]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  481 

22.  And  the  individual  sold  is  atomic  because  of  the  direct 
Upanifadic  use  of  the  word  as  well  as  mention  of  infmitesimality . 

The  soul  is  atomic  for  this  further  reason  that  the  Upani$ad 
directly  uses  a  word  implying  atomicity:  “The  atomic  Self  into 
which  the  vital  force  has  entered  in  five  ways  has  to  be  com¬ 
prehended  through  the  intellect”21  (Mu.  III.  i.  9).  From  the 
association  with  the  vital  force  it  is  understood  that  it  is  the 
individual  soul  that  is  here  referred  to  as  atomic.  Similarly  the 
infinitesimally  small  dimension  of  the  individual  soul  mentioned 
in,  “That  soul  is  to  be  known  as  a  hundredth  part  of  the  hun¬ 
dredth  part  of  the  tip  of  a  hair”  (Sv.  V.  9),  makes  us  understand 
that  it  is  atomic  in  nature.  And  there  is  another  illustration  of 
infinitesimality  in,  “That  inferior  (individual)  soul  is  seen  to  be 
finer  than  the  tip  of  the  iron  piece  at  the  head  of  a  goading 
stick”  (Sv.  V.  8). 

Objection :  If  the  soul  be  atomic  (and  consequently  located 
in  one  place),  will  this  not  involve  a  contradiction  for  it  to  have 
perceptions  all  over  the  body  while  remaining  at  one  place?  It 
is  a  matter  of  common  experience  that  people  remaining 
immersed  in  the  Ganga  or  some  lake  feel  a  coolness  in  every 
part  of  the  body,  while  in  summer  they  feel  a  heat  all  over  the 
body. 

Hence  the  answer  is  given  (by  the  opponent ): 

3lfo^$tpr5rf^  IR^II 

There  is  no  contradiction  as  in  the  case  of 

sandalwood  paste. 

23.  (The  souVs  atomicity  and  its  feeling  over  the  whole  body 
involve)  no  contradiction ,  just  as  in  the  case  (of  a  drop)  of 
sandal  paste. 

Just  as  a  drop  of  yellow  sandal  paste,  coming  in  contact  with 
a  particular  part  of  the  body,  produces  a  delightful  sensation  all 
over  the  body,  similarly  the  soul,  though  located  at  one  part 
of  the  body,  will  have  perception  all  over  the  body.  And  a 

^For  Sankara’s  interpretation,  see  his  commentary  on  the  Upanisad. 

31 


482 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[H.iii.23 


perception  (or  feeling)  all  over  the  body  is  not  opposed  to  the 
soul’s  nature,  since  it  is  in  contact  with  the  organ  of  touch  for 
the  contact  of  the  soul  with  the  organ  of  touch  exists  all  over 
the  skin,  and  the  skin  spreads  over  the  whole  body. 


^ferfwfd-?^r^Tr^[  Owing  to  peculiarity  of  position  (of  sandal 
paste)  ffer  if  such  be  the  objection,  then  ?r  not  so, 
for  (peculiar  position  is)  admitted  (for  soul  also)  ff?  because 
jgfe  (it  is)  in  the  heart. 


24.  If  it  be  objected  that  (the  argument  holds  good  in  the 
case  of  sandal  paste)  owing  to  its  peculiarity  of  position,  (but 
that  is  not  evident  in  the  case  of  the  soul),  then  we  say,  no,  (a 
peculiar  location)  for  the  soul  is  admitted  in  the  Upam§ads,  for 
it  exists  in  the  heart . 


Objection :  Someone  may  make  the  rejoinder  that  the  state¬ 
ment,  “No  contradiction  is  involved  as  in  the  case  of  sandal 
paste”,  is  illogical,  for  the  illustration  and  the  thing  illustrated 
are  not  similar.  The  illustration  of  the  sandal  paste  will  apply 
only  if  it  can  be  proved  that  the  soul  exists  merely  in  a  part  of 
the  body;  but  the  peculiarity  of  the  location,  viz  existence  in 
one  part  of  the  body,  in  the  case  of  the  sandal  paste,  as  well  as 
its  imparting  delight  to  the  whole  body,  is  a  matter  of  direct 
perception;  while  in  the  case  of  the  soul  what  is  perceived  is 
only  its  awareness  over  the  whole  body,  but  not  its  particular 
location.  If  it  be  said  (by  the  opponent)  that  this  is  inferable, 
then  (we  say  that)  an  inference  is  inadmissible  here,  for  the 
following  doubts  cannot  be  removed  (even  by  such  an  infer¬ 
ence):  Does  the  awareness  pertaining  to  the  whole  body  arise 
because  the  soul  spreads  over  the  whole  body  like  the  sense  of 
touch,  or  because  it  is  all-pervasive  like  space,  or  because  it  is 
atomic  in  size  and  exists  at  one  place  only? 

Opponent :  To  this  we  say,  this  creates  no  difficulty. 

Why? 

Because  that  is  the  admitted  fact;  for  it  is  admitted  even  in 


II.  iii.  25  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  483 

the  case  of  the  soul  that,  like  a  drop  of  sandal  paste,  it  exists  at 
a  particular  part  of  the  body;  it  has  a  peculiarity  of  location. 

How? 

The  answer  is:  Because  this  soul  is  mentioned  in  the  Upa- 
ni$ads  as  existing  in  the  heart,  as  is  evident  from  such  instruc¬ 
tions  as,  “For  this  Self  is  (i.e.  resides)  in  the  heart”  (Pr.  III.  6), 
“That  Self,  that  is  such,  is  in  the  heart”  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  3), 
“Which  is  the  Self?  This  infinite  entity  (Puru$a)  that  remains 
identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  the  organs, 
the  (self-effulgent)  light  within  the  heart”  (Bj:.  IV.  iii.  7). 
Hence  from  the  absence  of  any  disparity  between  the  illustra¬ 
tion  and  the  thing  illustrated  it  is  but  logical  to  conclude  that 
no  contradiction  is  involved,  as  in  the  case  of  a  drop  of  sandal 
paste. 

*pTT5T  IRKII 

cTT  Or  through  the  quality  (of  sentience)  as  is 

seen  in  the  world. 

2  5.  Or  on  the  analogy  of  what  is  seen  in  the  world ,  ( the  soul 
may  pervade  the  whole  body )  through  its  attribute  (of  senti¬ 
ence). 

Or  because  the  quality  of  sentience  (or  intelligence)  of  the 
soul  is  pervasive,  therefore,  though  the  soul  is  atomic,  still  there 
is  no  incongruity  if  its  action  (of  perception)  spreads  over  the 
whole  body.  This  is  just  like  what  is  observed  in  common  life; 
for  instance  the  light  of  a  gem  or  a  lamp,  occupying  only  a 
corner  of  an  inner  apartment,  spreads  over  the  whole  apartment 
and  does  its  work  everywhere  in  the  apartment. 

It  might  be  objected  that  since  the  sandal  paste  consists  of 
parts,  it  can  produce  delight  in  the  whole  body  by  scattering 
its  minute  particles;  but  the  atomic  soul  has  no  particles  through 
which  it  can  spread  over  the  entire  body.  Having  this  miscon¬ 
ception  in  view,  the  aphorism  says,  “through  the  quality  of 
sentience”. 

Objection :  How  again  can  an  attribute  exist  elsewhere  than 
in  the  substance  (in  which  it  inheres),  for  the  whiteness  of  a 
cloth  is  not  seen  to  exist  somewhere  other  than  the  cloth? 


484  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  25 

Opponent :  It  can  be  possible  like  the  light  of  a  lamp. 

Objection :  No,  for  that  too  is  considered  to  be  a  substance, 
for  a  luminous  substance  in  a  state  of  compactness  (of  its  parti¬ 
cles)  is  the  lamp,  and  that  very  luminous  substance  in  a  state 
of  diffusion  is  light. 

Opponent :  Hence  the  reply  is  being  given: 

iFERcT  IR^II 

Separate  existence  like  smell. 

26.  (The  quality  of  sentience  cm  have)  separate  existence  like 
smell. 

As  smell,  for  instance,  which  is  a  quality,  can  have  existence 
separately  from  the  odorous  substance,  since  the  smell  is 
perceived  even  when  the  odorous  things  like  flower  etc.  are 
nowhere  in  view,  similarly  though  the  soul  is  atomic,  its  quality 
of  sentience  can  remain  detached  from  it.  Hence  this  ground 
for  inference  that  a  quality  cannot  be  detached  from  its  sub¬ 
stance,  it  being  a  quality  like  colour  (or  form)  etc.,  has  no 
invariable  application,  since  smell,  which  is  a  quality,  is  seen  to 
exist  in  isolation  from  its  substance. 

Objection  :  Even  in  the  case  of  smell,  the  fact  is  that  it  gets 
detached  from  its  substance  together  with  a  part  of  it  (viz 
particles  of  matter). 

Opponent :  No,  for  the  main  source  from  which  this  detach¬ 
ment  will  occur  would  in  that  case  become  attenuated;  but  it  is 
seen  to  continue  undiminished  from  its  previous  state;  for  else 
it  would  become  diminished  in  weight  (mass)  etc.  as  compared 
with  its  earlier  state. 

Objection :  It  may  be  that  the  detached  particles  on  which 
smell  rests  are  so  few  in  number  (and  minute  in  size)  that  their 
detachment  goes  undetected.  The  minute  atoms  of  smell  spread 
all  around  and  give  rise  to  the  perception  of  smell  by  entering 
into  the  nostrils. 

Opponent :  No,  for  the  atoms  are  supersensuous  (and  so  the 
nose  cannot  perceive  the  atoms  of  smell),  at  the  same  time  that 
a  distinct  strong  fragrance  is  felt  in  the  case  of  such  flowers  as 


II.  iii.  28]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  485 

Nagakesara.  The  experience  in  common  life  is  not  of  the  form, 
“A  substance  with  aroma  has  been  smelt”,  but  the  common 
people  experience  thus:  “It  is  the  aroma  itself  that  has  been 
smelt”. 

Objection :  Since  it  is  not  a  matter  of  experience  that  form 
(or  colour)  etc.  can  exist  apart  from  their  substances,  it  is  also 
improper  to  think  that  smell  can  exist  separately  from  its 
substance. 

Opponent :  No,  for  this  being  a  matter  of  experience,  infer¬ 
ence  can  have  no  scope  here.  Accordingly,  things  are  to  be 
accepted  by  the  seekers  of  truth,  just  as  they  are  actually 
perceived,  for  no  such  rule  can  be  (inferentially)  arrived  at, 
that  because  the  quality  of  taste  is  felt  by  the  tongue,  therefore 
all  the  qualities  starting  from  colour  should  be  perceived  by  the 
tongue  itself. 


<rar  ^  ir'sii 

^  And  (the  Upanisad)  shows  *PTT  this. 

27.  And  the  Upanisad  also  shows  this. 

After  stating  that  the  soul  resides  in  the  heart  and  that  it  has 
the  size  of  an  atom  the  Upani$ad  shows  in  the  text,  “up  to  the 
tip  of  the  hair,  up  to  the  tip  of  the  nail”  (Ch.  VIII.  yiii.  1,  Bf. 
I.  iv.  7,  Kau.  IV.  20),  that  through  the  quality  of  sentience,  that 
very  soul  pervades  the  whole  body. 

IRSII 

Because  taught  separately. 

28.  (The  soul  and  its  intelligence  are  separate ),  since  they  are 
taught  separately  (in  the  Upanisads ) . 

From  the  text,  “presiding  over  the  body  with  the  help  of 
intelligence”  (Kau.  III.  6),  where  the  soul  and  intelligence  are 
spoken  of  separately  as  having  the  relationship  of  the  agent  and 
the  instrument  (respectively),  it  is  understood  that  the  soul 
pervades  the  body  through  its  quality  of  intelligence.  And  in 


486  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [n.  iii.  28 

the  text,  “it  absorbs  at  the  time  (of  sleep)  the  power  of  percep¬ 
tion  of  the  organs  through  its  own  consciousness”  (Bf.  II.  i. 
17),  there  occurs  an  instruction  about  consciousness  existing 
separately  from  the  agent,  the  embodied  soul;  and  this  instruc¬ 
tion  only  confirms  this  very  idea.  Hence  the  soul  is  atomic. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say: 

iRS.ll 

$  But  such  appellation  (occurs) 

owing  to  the  dominance  of  the  modes  of  that  (intellect), 
as  in  the  case  of  the  supreme  Self. 

29.  But  the  soul  comes  to  have  such  appellations  because  of 
the  dominance  of  the  modes  of  that  intellect;  this  is  fust  as  in 
the  case  of  the  supreme  Self . 

The  word  “but”  overrules  the  opposing  point  of  view.  It  is 
not  a  fact  that  the  soul  is  atomic.  It  has  been  said  that  the  soul 
is  none  other  than  the  supreme  Brahman,  for  there  is  no  men¬ 
tion  of  its  origin  in  the  Vedas,  while  the  entry  of  the  supreme 
Brahman  is  mentioned  there  and  the  identity  of  the  two  is 
taught.  Now  if  the  individual  soul  be  none  other  than  the 
supreme  Brahman,  then  the  soul  should  have  the  same  magnitude 
as  the  supreme  Brahman;  and  as  it  is  mentioned  in  the  scripture 
that  the  supreme  Brahman  is  omnipresent,  so  the  soul  also  must 
be  omnipresent.  Thus  only  will  those  statements  stand  vindicated 
that  are  made  in  such  texts  of  the  Vedas  and  Smftds  about  the 
omnipresence  of  the  soul  as:  “That  Self  is  great  and  birthless 
which  remains  identified  with  the  intellect  and  in  the  midst  of 
the  organs”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  22).  Moreover,  it  does  not  stand  to 
reason  that  an  atomic  soul  should  have  a  feeling  of  pain  all  over 
the  body. 

Opponent :  This  can  be  so  owing  to  its  contact  with  the  organ 
of  touch. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  in  that  case,  even  when  a  thorn  pricks  the 
skin,  one  should  feel  the  pain  all  over  the  body,  since  the  contact 
between  the  thorn  and  the  skin  is  a  contact  with  the  skin  as  a 
whole,  which  spreads  over  the  whole  body.  But  as  a  matter  of 


II.iii.29]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  487 

fact,  a  man  pricked  by  a  thorn  under  the  foot  feels  the  pain  in 
the  sole  of  the  foot  only.  It  is  not  also  possible  for  any  quality 
of  the  atom  to  spread  out  (beyond  the  substratum),  since  the 
quality  exists  where  its  substance  is.  Unless  the  quality  subsists 
in  its  own  substance,  it  will  cease  to  be  a  quality  at  all.  And  it 
was  explained  how  the  light  of  a  lamp  is  but  a  separated  sub¬ 
stance  (and  not  a  mere  quality).  Smell  also,  which  is  understood 
to  be  a  quality,  can  move  out  only  when  carried  on  its  substance 
(particles),  for  else  it  may  as  well  cease  to  be  a  quality.  Thus  it 
has  been  said  by  the  adored  Dvaipayana,  “ After  perceiving 
smell  in  water,  should  some  inexperienced  people  say  that  it 
belongs  to  water,  still  one  should  know  that  smell  belongs  to 
earth,  though  it  floats  on  water  and  air”.  If  the  intelligence  of 
the  soul  spreads  over  the  entire  body,  then  the  soul  cannot  be 
atomic;  (for)  intelligence  must  be  the  soul’s  very  nature  like  heat 
and  light  of  fire.  No  such  distinction  as  between  a  quality  and 
its  substance  can  exist  here.  And  the  view  was  refuted  that  the 
soul  is  of  the  size  of  the  body.  As  a  last  resort,  the  soul  is  omni¬ 
present.  To  explain  how  in  that  case  there  can  be  any  mention 
of  atomicity  etc.,  the  aphorism  says,  “But  the  soul  comes  to 
have  such  appellations  because  of  the  dominance  of  the  modes 
of  that  intellect”.  Desire,  dislike,  happiness,  sorrow,  etc.  are  the 
modes  of  that  intellect.  These  modes  constitute  the  essence  or 
chief  factors  in  the  attainment  of  the  state  of  transmigratorir'^ss 
by  the  soul.  For  unless  it  be  through  the  modes  of  the  intellect 
there  can  be  no  transmigratory  state  for  the  absolute  Self. 
Though  the  Self  is  not  an  agent  and  experiencer,  and  though  It 
has  no  transmigratoriness  and  is  ever  free,  still  It  comes  to  have 
the  states  of  being  an  agent  and  an  experiencer,  this  being 
caused  by  the  superimposition  of  the  modes  of  the  intellect 
acting  as  a  limiting  adjunct.  Hence  owing  to  the  predominance 
of  the  modes  of  that  intellect,  the  soul  is  said  to  have  a  dimen¬ 
sion  corresponding  to  that  of  the  intellect.  And  it  is  said  that  it 
departs  from  the  body  and  so  on,  in  accordance  as  the  intellect 
does  so;  but  the  soul  does  not  do  so  naturally.  Thus  it  is  that 
after  speaking  of  the  atomicity  of  the  soul,  the  Upani$ad  speaks 
of  infinitude  about  that  very  soul  in,  “The  soul  is  to  be  known 
as  a  hundredth  part  of  a  hundredth  part  of  a  hair’s  end,  into 


488  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.iii.29 

which  it  can  be  fancied  to  be  divided.  And  that  soul  again  is 
infinite”  (Sv.  V.  9).  This  can  be  reasonably  reconciled  only  if 
the  atomic  size  of  the  individual  soul  be  owing  to  limiting 
adjuncts,  but  infinitude  be  its  innate  nature;  for  both  these 
cannot  be  thought  of  to  be  true  in  the  primary  sense.  Nor  can 
it  be  understood  that  is  has  infinitude  in  a  figurative  sense,  since 
it  is  the  identity  of  the  individual  soul  with  Brahman  that  is 
sought  to  be  taught  in  all  the  Upanisads.  So  also  in  another 
declaration  of  infinitesimality,  “The  soul  appears  to  be  inferior 
and  of  the  size  of  the  tip  of  a  goading  stick,  owing  to  the 
appearance  of  the  modes  of  the  intellect  as  its  own  attributes” 
(Sv.  V.  8),  the  soul  is  declared  to  have  the  dimension  of  the  tip 
of  a  goading  stick  owing  to  its  contact  with  the  attributes  of  the 
intellect,  but  not  naturally  in  itself.  Even  in  the  text,  “This 
atomic  (subtle)  Self  is  to  be  realized  through  the  intellect”  (Mu. 
III.  i.  9),  it  is  not  taught  that  the  individual  soul  is  atomic  in 
dimension,  for  it  is  the  supreme  Self  that  has  been  introduced 
in  that  context  as  something  to  be  known  through  the  favour¬ 
ableness  (i.e.  purity)  of  the  intellect,  It  being  beyond  the  grasp 
of  the  eye  etc.22  Moreover,  atomicity  in  the  literal  sense  is 
inadmissible  even  for  the  individual  soul.  Hence  it  is  to  be 
understood  that  the  mention  of  atomicity  is  intended  to  convey 
the  idea  that  the  Self  is  inscrutable  or  that  this  is  done  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  limiting  adjunct.  Similarly  in  such  texts  as, 
“Presiding  over  the  body  through  intelligence”  (Kau.  III.  6), 
where  a  separation  (between  soul  and  intellect)  is  spoken  of, 
the  sentence  is  to  be  construed  to  mean  that  the  soul  presides 
over  the  body  through  the  intellect  alone  which  is  its  limiting 
adjunct.  The  mere  statement  (of  difference)  here  is  like  talking 
of  the  body  of  a  stone  pestle  (where  the  “body”  and  the  “stone” 
are  non-different) ;  for  it  has  been  already  stated  that  there  is 
no  such  division  here  as  between  quality  and  substance.  As  for 
the  statement  that  the  heart  is  the  residence  of  the  soul,  that  too 
is  made  from  the  standpoint  of  the  intellect,  for  the  intellect 

"The  previous  verse  being,  “It  is  not  comprehended  through  the  eye, 
nor  through  speech,  nor  through  the  other  senses. . . .  Since  one  becomes 
purified  in  mind  through  the  favourableness  of  the  intellect,  therefore  can 
one  see  that  indivisible  Self  through  meditation”  (Mu.  III.  i.  8). 


II.  iii.  30]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A$YA  489 

resides  in  the  heart.  So  also  in  the  following  texts  it  is  shown 
that  such  actions  as  departure  from  the  body  are  dependent 
upon  limiting  adjuncts:  “He  deliberated,  ‘As  a  result  of  whose 
departure  shall  I  rise  up  (from  the  body)?  And  as  a  result  of 
whose  continuance  shall  I  remain  established?’  He  created 
Prana ”  (i.e.  energy  that  is  non-different  from  intelligence)  (Pr. 
VI.  3-4).  And  from  the  absence  of  its  death,  it  is  gathered  that 
the  going  to  and  coming  back  from  the  other  world  are  also 
(intrinsically)  absent  in  the  soul.  For  unless  one  has  got  detached 
from  the  body,  there  can  be  no  following  a  course  or  return¬ 
ing.  Thus  since  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  there  is  a 
predominance  of  the  attributes  of  its  adjuncts,  it  has  the  appel¬ 
lations  of  atomicity  etc.,  “as  in  the  case  of  Prdjna  (the  supreme 
Self)”.  Even  as  in  the  case  of  Prdjna ,  who  is  the  supreme  Self, 
there  is  a  mention  of  atomicity  etc.  in  connection  with  Its 
meditation  as  a  qualified  entity,  where  the  attributes  of  the 
limiting  adjuncts  dominate,  as  for  instance  in,  “Minuter  than  a 
grain  of  paddy  or  barley”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  3),  “He  is  identified 
with  the  mind  and  has  the  vital  force  as  His  body,  all  (good) 
smells  are  His,  all  (good)  tastes  are  His,  all  (good)  desires  are 
His.  His  resolves  are  true”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2),  and  so  on,  so  also  is 
the  case  with  the  individual. 

Opponent :  It  may  be  objected  thus:  If  the  soul  be  thought  of 
as  attaining  the  worldly  state  (of  transmigration)  under  the 
dominance  of  the  modes  of  the  intellect,  then  a  cessation  of  the 
conjunction  between  the  soul  and  the  intellect,  which  are 
divergent,  must  be  inevitable.  Thus  when  the  intellect  gets 
detached,  the  soul  will  become  undiscemible,  and  hence  there 
will  arise  the  predicament  of  its  becoming  non-existent  or  ceas¬ 
ing  to  be  a  transmigratory  soul. 

Veddntin  :  So  the  reply  is  being  given: 

^  And  1  since  (this  association  of  soul  and 

intellect)  persists  as  long  as  the  soul  continues  to  be  a  transmi¬ 
gratory  entity  sfta:  no  defect  arises,  for  so  it  is  seen 

(in  the  scriptures). 


490  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [n.  iii.  30 

30.  And  because  the  contact  between  the  soul  and  the  intellect 
persists  so  long  as  the  worldly  state  of  the  soul  continues y  there 
can  be  no  defect ,  for  this  is  what  is  ptet  with  in  the  scriptures. 

There  should  be  no  such  defect  as  mentioned  just  now. 

Why? 

Because  the  contact  with  the  intellect  endures  all  through  the 
state  of  the  soul’s  transmigratory  existence.  The  contact  of  the 
soul  with  the  intellect  does  not  cease  so  long  as  the  soul  con¬ 
tinues  in  its  transmigratory  state,  so  long  as  its  condition  of 
transmigratoriness  is  not  sublated  through  complete  realization. 
And  this  individuality  and  the  worldly  state  of  the  soul  last 
only  as  long  as  there  is  this  connection  with  the  intellect  serving 
as  a  limiting  adjunct.  In  reality  there  is  no  such  thing  as  an 
individual  soul  apart  from  what  it  appears  under  the  influence 
of  the  intellect  acting  as  a  conditioning  factor.  For  when 
engaged  in  ascertaining  the  purport  of  the  Upani$ads,  we  do 
not  come  across  any  other  (second)  conscious  entity  besides 
God  who  is  by  nature  ever  free,  about  which  fact  these  texts 
stand  as  evidence:  “There  is  no  other  witness  but  Him,  no  other 
hearer  but  Him,  no  other  thinker  but  Him,  no  other  knower 
but  Him”  (Bf.  III.  vii.  23),  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi), 
“I  am  Brahman”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  7),  and  a  hundred  others  of  this 
kind. 

Opponent :  How  again  is  it  gathered  that  the  contact  with 
the  intellect  lasts  as  long  as  the  state  of  transmigratoriness  of  the 
soul  persists? 

The  (Vedantiri’s)  answer  is  given  in,  “For  this  is  what  is  met 
with  (in  the  scriptures)”.  Thus  the  scripture  reveals:  “This 
infinite  entity  ( purusa )  that  remains  identified  with  cognition 
( vijnana )  in  the  midst  of  the  organs,  the  (self-effulgent)  light 
within  the  heart.  Assuming  the  likeness  (of  the  intellect),  it 
moves  between  the  two  worlds;  it  thinks  as  it  were,  and  shakes 
as  it  were”  (Bf.  IV.  iii,  7)  etc.  The  term  “identified  with  cogni¬ 
tion”,  occurring  there,  means  “identified  with  the  intellect”;  for 
elsewhere  occurs  the  text,  “identified  with  cognition  (i.e.  the 
intellect),  identified  with  the  mind,  identified  with  the  vital 
force,  identified  with  the  eye,  identified  with  the  ear”  (Bj\  IV. 


II.  iii.  31] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


491 


iv.  5),  where  the  one  “identified  with  cognition”  is  mentioned 
along  with  the  one  identified  with  the  mind  etc.,  and  the  identity 
with  the  intellect  is  meant  to  imply  a  dominance  of  the  modes 
of  the  intellect.  It  is  like  saying,  “Devadatta  is  all  sex”  where 
the  idea  sought  to  be  implied  is  that  he  is  dominated  by  a  pas¬ 
sion  for  women.  And  the  text,  “Assuming  the  likeness  (of  the 
intellect),  it  moves  between  the  two  worlds  (this  and  the  next)” 
(Bf.  IV.  iii.  7),  shows  that  even  while  going  to  another  world, 
there  is  no  dissociation  from  the  intellect.  Likeness  of  what? 
It  can  be  understood  that  the  likeness  is  with  the  intellect  itself, 
for  that  is  near  at  hand.  And  that  very  fact  is  pointed  out  in, 
“It  thinks  as  it  were,  and  shakes  as  it  were”  (ibid.),  where  the 
idea  implied  is  this:  “This  one  does  not  think  by  itself,  nor 
does  it  move;  but  when  the  intellect  thinks,  it  seems  to  think, 
and  when  the  intellect  moves,  it  seems  to  move.”  Moreover,  this 
connection  of  the  soul  with  the  intellect  has  but  false  ignorance 
at  its  root,  and  this  false  ignorance  cannot  be  removed  by  any¬ 
thing  other  than  complete  knowledge  (of  Brahman).  Hence 
this  connection  with  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the  intellect  does 
not  cease  so  long  as  the  identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  is  not 
realized.  And  this  is  shown  in,  “I  have  known  this  great  Puru$a 
(infinite  entity)  who  shines  like  the  sun  (i.e.  self-effulgent),  and 
is  beyond  darkness  (i.e.  untouched  by  ignorance).  Knowing 
Him  alone  one  goes  beyond  death.  There  is  no  other  path  to 
proceed  along”  (Sv.  III.  8). 

Opponent :  You  cannot  certainly  admit  any  connection  of 
the  soul  with  the  intellect  during  sleep  and  dissolution,  for  the 
Upani$ad  says,  “O  amiable  one,  he  then  becomes  identified  with 
Existence  (Brahman),  he  becomes  absorbed  in  his  own  Self’ 
(Ch.  VI.  viii.  1).  This  also  follows  from  the  admission  of  the 
(final)  dissolution  of  the  entire  creation.  So  how  can  there  be 
the  persistence  of  the  contact  with  the  intellect  as  long  as  the 
transmigratory  state  of  the  soul  endures? 

Vedmtin :  The  answer  is  thus: 


^  But  because  of  becoming  manifest 


492  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  31 

in  the  case  of  this  which  already  exists  like  man¬ 

hood  etc. 

31.  Rather  because  that  contact  ('with  the  intellect  etc.)  'which 
remains  latent  (in  sleep  and  dissolution)  can  become  manifest 
(during  'waking  and  creation)  like  manhood  etc .  (from  boyhood 
etc.). 

We  see  in  the  world  that  manhood  etc.  though  existing  all 
the  time  in  a  latent  state,  are  not  perceived  during  boyhood  etc. 
and  are  thus  treated  as  though  non-existent,  but  they  become 
manifest  in  youth  etc.;  and  it  is  not  a  fact  that  they  evolve  out 
of  nothing,  for  in  that  case  even  a  eunuch  should  grow  those 
(moustaches  etc.).  Similarly,  too,  the  contact  with  the  intellect 
etc.  remains  in  a  state  of  latency  during  sleep  and  dissolution 
and  emerges  again  during  waking  and  creation.  For  thus  alone 
it  becomes  logical.  Nothing  can  possibly  be  born  capriciously, 
for  that  would  lead  to  unwarranted  possibilities  (of  effects 
being  produced  without  causes).  The  Upani§ad  also  shows  that 
this  waking  from  sleep  is  possible  because  of  the  existence  of 
ignorance  in  a  seed  form  (remaining  dormant  in  sleep): 
“Though  unified  with  Existence  (Brahman)  in  sleep,  they  do 
not  understand,  ‘We  have  merged  in  Existence.’  They  return 
here  as  a  tiger  or  a  lion”  (just  as  they  had  been  here  before) 
(Ch.  VI.  ix.  3)  etc.  Hence  it  is  proved  that  the  contact  with 
the  intellect  etc.  persists  as  long  as  the  individuality  of  the  soul 
lasts. 


iflSW  ll^ll 

Else  will  arise  the  possibility 

of  constant  perception  or  non-perception  or 
either  of  the  two  (powers)  becoming  debarred  (or  delimited). 

32.  Else  (if  the  existence  of  the  internal  organ  be  not  admitted) 
there  'will  be  the  possibility  of  either  constant  perception  or  non¬ 
perception  or  it  will  have  to  be  admitted  that  either  of  the  powers 
(of  the  soul  or  of  the  organs)  becomes  (suddenly)  debarred  (or 
delimited  or  lost). 


n.  iii.  32  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BH A$YA  493 

This  internal  organ,  constituting  a  conditioning  factor  for  the 
Self  is  variously  spoken  of  in  different  places  as  the  manas 
(faculty  of  thinking — Bf.  I.  v.  3),  buddhi  (faculty  of  knowing — 
Ka.  II.  iii.  10),  vijnana  (cognition  or  egoism — Tai.  II.  v.  1),  citta 
(feeling  or  memory — Mu.  III.  i.  9,  Pr.  IV.  8).  Occasionally  it  is 
called  variously  in  accordance  with  its  moods — it  being  called 
the  mind  when  it  functions  as  the  doubter,  (thinker),  etc.,  the 
intellect  when  it  makes  specific  ascertainment,  and  so  on.  And  it 
must  of  necessity  be  admitted  that  an  internal  organ  of  this  kind 
does  exist,  for  unless  that  organ  is  admitted,  there  will  be  the 
contingency  of  either  constant  perception  or  non-perception.  For 
when  the  accessories  of  perception,  viz  the  soul,  organs,  and 
objects  of  perception,  are  in  contiguity,  perception  should  occur 
always.  Or  even  if  in  the  presence  together  of  all  the  factors  of 
perception  no  result  is  produced,  then  there  will  be  the  possibility 
of  constant  non-perception.  But  this  does  not  tally  with  experi¬ 
ence.  Or  else  it  will  have  to  be  admitted  that  the  power  of  either 
of  the  factors  (involved  in  perception) — viz  the  soul  or  the  sense- 
organ — stands  debarred  from  itself.  But  it  is  not  possible  for  the 
power  of  the  soul  to  be  debarred  from  the  soul,  since  the  soul  is 
changeless.  Nor  can  the  power  of  any  sense-organ  be  debarred 
from  the  organ,  for  an  organ  that  has  its  power  intact  in  the 
earlier  and  succeeding  moments,  cannot  have  it  denied  suddenly 
(in  the  middle).  Accordingly  the  mind  must  be  the  entity, 
through  the  alertness  of  which  perception  occurs,  and  through 
the  want  of  alertness  of  which  it  does  not  occur.  In  support  of 
this  is  the  Vedic  text,  “I  was  absent-minded,  I  did  not  see  it;  I 
was  absent-minded,  I  did  not  hear  it”  (Bf.  I.  v.  3),  and  “It  is 
through  the  mind  that  one  sees  and  hears”  (ibid.).  The  Upani$adic 
text  also  shows  that  desire  etc.  are  its  modes,  “Desire,  resolve, 
doubt,  faith,  want  of  faith,  steadiness,  unsteadiness,  shame,  intel¬ 
ligence,  and  fear — all  these  are  but  the  mind”  (ibid.).  Hence  the 
aphorism  stands  justified  that  “The  soul  comes  to  have  such 
appellations  because  of  the  dominance  of  the  attributes  of  that 
intellect”  (II.  iii.  29). 


494 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 
Topic  14:  Soul  as  Agent 


[II.  ixi.  3) 


113311 

(The  soul  must  be)  an  agent  so  that  the 

scriptures  may  have  a  purpose. 

33.  The  individual  soul  must  be  an  agent ,  for  thus  alone  the 
scriptures  become  purposeful. 

In  continuation  of  the  topic  dealing  with  the  qualities  of  the 
intellect  as  mainly  influencing  the  soul,  another  attribute  of  the 
soul  is  being  elaborated:  “This  individual  soul  must  also  be  an 
agent.” 

Why? 

“For  thus  only  the  scriptures  become  purposeful.”  In  this  way 
only,  such  texts  about  injunction  as,  “One  should  perform  a 
sacrifice”,  “One  should  pour  an  oblation”,  “One  should  make 
gifts”,  etc.  become  purposeful.  Otherwise  they  become  meaning¬ 
less.  For  they  enjoin  particular  duties  for  an  agent  whose  presence 
is  a  reality;  and  that  kind  of  injunction  can  have  no  sense  if  there 
be  no  (soul  with)  agentship.  Similarly,  it  is  only  thus  that  this 
text  becomes  meaningful:  “And  this  one  is  the  seer,  feeler,  hearer, 
thinker,  ascertained  doer — the  Puru$a  that  is  a  knower  by  nature” 
(Pr.  IV.  9). 

Because  of  the  teaching  about  roaming. 

34.  (The  soul  is  an  agent)  because  there  are  teachings  about  its 
roaming. 

The  individual  soul  is  an  agent  for  this  further  reason  that  in  a 
context  dealing  with  the  soul,  the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  the  soul’s 
roaming  about  in  the  intermediate  state  (of  dream):  “(Himself 
immortal),  he  goes  wherever  he  likes”  (Bf.  IV.  iii.  12),  and  “It 
moves  about,  as  it  pleases,  in  its  own  body”  (Bf.  II.  i.  18). 

35.  (The  soul  is  an  agent)  because  of  its  taking  up  ( the  organs). 


n.  iii.  36]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  495 

The  soul  has  agentship  for  the  further  reason  that  under  the 
topic  of  the  soul  the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  the  taking  up  (or  using) 
of  the  organs  by  the  soul:  “(When  this  being,  full  of  conscious¬ 
ness,  is  thus  asleep),  it  absorbs  at  the  time  the  power  of  percep¬ 
tion  of  the  organs  through  its  own  intelligence”  (Br.  II.  i.  17), 
and  also,  “taking  up  the  organs”  (Br.  II.  i.  18). 

\\^\W 

xr  And  because  of  mention  (as  an  agent)  fwRT* 

in  respect  of  work  ^  ^  were  it  not  so,  fH&T-fyrftr:  there 
would  have  been  a  contrary  indication. 

36.  And  the  soul  is  an  agent  because  of  the  mention  (as  such) 
in  respect  of  action;  were  it  not  soy  there  would  have  been  a 
contrary  indication . 

That  the  individual  soul  has  agency  follows  from  this  addi¬ 
tional  consideration  that  the  scripture  designates  it  as  being  the 
agent  in  respect  of  Vedic  and  ordinary  duties,  ic  Vijnana  (or 
Intelligence,  i.e.  the  individual  soul  having  it)  spreads  (i.e.  per¬ 
forms)  the  sacrifices  as  well  as  works”  (Tai.  II.  v.  1). 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  word  vijnana  known  as  a  synonym  for 
the  intellect?  So  how  can  it  indicate  the  agency  of  the  soul? 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  this  is  in  fact  a  designation  of  the  soul 
and  not  of  the  intellect.  Had  it  not  been  used  for  the  soul,  there 
would  have  been  a  reversal  of  the  designation — the  indication 
would  have  been  made  by  saying  “through  the  intellect”  (by 
using  vijnana  in  the  instrumental  case,  and  not  in  the  nominative 
case).  Thus  it  is  that  at  another  place,  where  the  intellect  is 
meant,  the  word  vijnana  is  seen  to  be  used  with  the  instrumental 
case-ending:  “It  absorbs  at  the  time  the  power  of  perception  of 
the  organs  vijndnena — through  its  own  intelligence”  (Br.  II.  i. 
17).  But  here  in  “Vijnana  spreads  the  sacrifice”,  the  use  is  with 
the  nominative  case-ending,  whereby  the  soul,  different  from  the 
intellect,  is  indicated.  Hence  it  is  nothing  wrong. 

Here  somebody  (an  opponent)  says:  If  the  soul,  which  is  quite 
different  from  the  intellect,  be  the  doer,  then,  being  independent, 
it  would  do  things  that  are  delightful  and  beneficial  to  itself,  and 


496  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  36 

not  act  contrariwise.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is  noticed  to  do 
the  opposite  as  well.  Such  irregular  activity  cannot  be  possible 
for  the  independent  soul. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  answer  is  being  given: 


As  in  the  case  of  perception  3rf?BI*T:  there  is  no 

uniformity. 


57.  As  in  the  case  of  perception  (there  is  no  uniformity ),  so 
also  there  is  no  uniformity  (in  the  case  of  action ). 

Just  as  this  soul,  independent  though  it  is  as  regards  its  own 
perception,  yet  perceives  both  good  and  bad  without  any  invari¬ 
able  rule,  so  also  it  can  accomplish  both  good  and  bad  without 
any  uniform  rule. 

Opponent :  It  is  not  independent  even  as  regards  perception, 
for  it  is  dependent  on  the  acceptance  of  the  means  of  perception. 

Veddntin :  No,  for  the  means  of  perception  serve  only  the 
purpose  of  presenting  the  objects;  but  in  the  actual  perception 
the  soul  is  independent,  since  it  is  endowed  with  consciousness. 
Moreover,  the  soul  is  not  wholly  independent  in  the  matter  of 
activities  yielding  results,  for  it  has  to  depend  on  particular  space, 
time,  and  cause.  An  agent  does  not  cease  to  have  its  agentship 
just  because  it  has  to  depend  on  accessories;  for  a  cook  can  very 
well  be  a  cook  even  though  he  has  to  depend  on  fuel,  water,  etc. 
And  because  of  a  diversity  of  the  accessories,  it  is  nothing  contra¬ 
dictory  for  the  soul  to  engage  in  an  irregular  way  in  activities 
yielding  good,  bad,  and  indifferent  results. 

sifasfawiw  ll^ll 

qfofawnq  Because  of  a  reversal  of  power. 


38.  (The  soul  must  be  the  agent) ,  for  (if  the  intellect  be  so ), 
it  will  lead  to  a  reversal  of  power . 

For  this  reason  also  the  soul,  that  is  different  from  the  intellect, 
should  be  the  agent.  On  the  contrary,  if  the  intellect,  understood 


II.  iii.  40]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  497 

by  the  word  vijndna ,  be  the  agent,  then  there  will  be  a  reversal 
of  power — the  instrumental  power  of  the  intellect  will  be  negated 
and  the  power  of  the  agent  will  accrue.  Again,  on  the  assump¬ 
tion  that  the  power  of  the  agent  belongs  to  the  intellect,  it  will 
have  to  be  admitted  that  the  intellect  itself  constitutes  the  subject 
of  egoity;  for  all  tendency  to  activity  is  seen  to  be  preceded  by 
the  ego-consciousness,  as  in  “I  go”,  “I  come”,  “I  eat”,  “I  drink”, 
and  so  on.  Again,  for  that  intellect  that  is  equipped  with  the 
power  of  the  agent  and  possessed  of  the  ability  of  doing  every¬ 
thing,  we  have  to  fancy  some  other  instrument  that  can  be  used 
for  accomplishing  everything.  For  despite  the  ability  possessed 
by  an  agent,  he  is  seen  to  engage  in  works  with  the  help  of  some 
instruments.  In  that  case,  the  fight  (between  us)  will  centre 
round  a  term,  but  there  will  be  no  difference  as  regards  the 
thing  itself,  since  (in  either  case)  agentship  is  conceded  for  one 
who  is  different  from  the  instrument. 

TOianran*  huh 

^  And  *TRTfa-3PTT^R{  because  of  the  negation  of  deep  medi¬ 
tation. 

39.  And  (the  send  must  be  a?i  agent)  because  (a  contrary  sup - 
position  will)  lead  to  a  negation  of  deep  meditation  (on  God). 

Samddhi  (deep  meditation),  taught  in  the  Upani$ads  as  a  means 
for  the  realization  of  that  Self  that  is  known  from  the  Upani§ads 
alone,  is  spoken  of  in  such  texts  as,  “The  Self,  my  dear,  should 
be  realized — should  be  heard  of,  reflected  on,  and  profoundly 
meditated  upon”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  5),  “That  is  to  be  searched  for,  that 
is  to  be  realized”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  “Meditate  on  the  Self  thus 
with  the  help  of  Ow”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  6),  and  so  on.  This  meditation, 
too,  cannot  be  reasonably  sustained  if  the  soul  be  not  the  agent 
(of  meditation).  From  this  fact  also  the  agentship  of  the  soul  is 
proved. 

Topic  15:  The  Soul  under  two  Conditions 

wr  ^  creftwn  nvoii 

^  And  (rather)  zpqj  as  cTCTT  a  carpenter  (exists)  under 

both  conditions. 


32 


498  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  40 

40.  And  ( rather )  this  is  like  the  carpenter  existing  under  both 
conditions . 

Thus  the  agentship  of  the  embodied  soul  has  been  shown  with 
the  help  of  such  reasons  as  the  purposefulness  of  the  scriptures. 
Now  it  is  being  considered  whether  this  is  natural  or  a  result  of 
conditioning  factors.  When  in  such  a  doubt ,  the  conclusion 
arrived  at  (by  the  opponent )  may  be  that  it  follows  from  these 
very  reasons  of  the  purposefulness  of  the  scriptures  and  so  on 
that  the  agentship  is  natural,  for  no  reason  is  in  evidence  for 
modifying  this  conclusion. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say  that  it  is  not  possible 
for  the  soul  to  have  natural  agentship,  for  that  would  lead  to  a 
negation  of  liberation.  If  agentship  be  the  very  nature  of  the  Self, 
there  can  be  no  freedom  from  it,  as  fire  can  have  no  freedom 
from  heat.  Moreover,  for  one  who  has  not  got  rid  of  agentship, 
there  can  be  no  achievement  of  the  highest  human  goal  (libera¬ 
tion),  for  agentship  is  a  sort  of  misery. 

Opponent :  Even  while  the  power  of  agentship  continues,  the 
highest  human  goal  can  be  achieved  through  the  giving  up  of 
activities  consequent  on  that.  And  that  avoidance  of  activity 
follows  froiji  the  avoidance  of  its  causes  (viz  merit,  demerit,  etc.). 
This  is  just  like  the  absence  of  the  act  of  burning  by  fire  when 
the  fuel  is  removed,  even  though  the  fire  has  still  the  power  to 
bum. 

Vedantin  :  No,  since  the  causes  (of  activity,  viz  merit,  demerit, 
etc.)  become  connected  with  (the  agent  through)  the  activities 
that  his  power  necessarily  evokes,  (for  power  without  the  corre¬ 
sponding  act  is  inconceivable).  And  when  they  become  connected 
in  this  way,  it  is  impossible  to  get  rid  of  them  wholly. 

Opponent :  Liberation  will  be  achieved  on  the  strength  of  the 
Vedic  injunction  itself.23 

Vedantin  :  No,  since  anything  that  can  be  acquired  through 
practice  is  impermanent.  Moreover,  it  has  been  stated  that  libera¬ 
tion  stands  established  from  the  fact  that  the  soul  has  been 
expounded  (in  the  Upani$ads)  to  be  eternally  pure,  enlightened, 

23  As  the  Vedic  injunction  (about  sacrifices  etc.)  can  change  a  human 
being  into  god,  so  it  can  change  an  agent  into  non-agent. 


II.  iii.  40]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  499 

and  free.  But  the  presentation  of  such  a  soul  cannot  be  logically 
justified  if  agentship  be  natural.  Hence  the  agentship  of  the  soul 
arises  from  the  superimposition  of  the  attributes  of  the  limiting 
adjuncts;  it  is  not  innate.  In  support  of  this  is  the  Vedic  text, 
“It  thinks  as  it  were,  and  shakes  as  it  were”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  7).  The 
text,  “The  intelligent  people  call  the  soul  which  is  associated  with 
body,  organs,  and  mind,  as  the  enjoyer”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  4),  shows  that 
the  soul  when  in  association  with  the  limiting  adjuncts,  gets  the 
special  characteristic  of  being  an  enjoyer.  To  the  discriminating 
people  there  can  be  no  individual  soul,  distinct  from  the  supreme 
Self,  which  can  be  the  agent  or  experiencer,  for  the  Upani$ad 
declares,  “There  is  no  other  witness  but  Him”  (Br.  III.  vii.  23), 
etc. 

Opponent :  If  apart  from  the  supreme  Self,  there  be  no  intelli¬ 
gent  soul  which  is  an  agent  and  distinct  from  the  assemblage  of 
body  and  organs,  then  it  would  come  to  this  that  the  supreme 
Self  Itself  would  be  the  entity  undergoing  transmigration  and 
becoming  the  agent  and  the  experiencer. 

Vedantin:  No,  since  the  states  of  being  an  agent  and  an 
experiencer  are  conjured  up  by  ignorance.  Thus  the  scripture 
also  shows  that  the  individual  soul  is  an  agent  and  an  experiencer 
when  in  a  state  of  ignorance:  “Because  when  there  is  duality, 
as  it  were,  ...then  one  sees  another”  (Br.  II.  iv.  14);  and  then 
the  scripture  denies  those  very  agentship  and  experiencership  in 
the  state  of  enlightenment:  “But  when  to  the  knower  of 
Brahman  everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what  should  one 
see  and  through  what?”  (ibid.).  Similarly,  the  Upanisad  shows 
how  like  a  falcon  flying  in  the  sky,  the  soul  becomes  tired  in 
the  waking  and  dream  states  owing  to  its  association  with  limiting 
adjuncts;  and  then  the  Upani§ad  shows  the  absence  of  that  fatigue 
in  the  sleep  state  where  the  soul  is  embraced  by  the  intelligent 
(supreme)  Self;  for  the  commencement  is  made  with,  “That  is 
his  real  form,  in  which  all  objects  of  desire  have  been  attained 
and  are  but  the  Self,  and  which  is  free  from  desires  and  devoid 
of  grief”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  21);  and  the  conclusion  is  made  with,  “This 
is  its  supreme  attainment,  this  is  its  supreme  glory,  this  is  its 
highest  world,  this  is  its  supreme  bliss”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  32).  This 
fact  is  stated  by  the  teacher  (Vyasa)  in,  “And  (rather)  this  is 


500  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  40 

like  the  carpenter  existing  under  both  conditions”.  The  word  “ ca 
(and)”  is  used  in  the  sense  of  “but”  (rather).  It  is  not  to  be 
thought  thus  that  the  agentship  is  natural  to  the  soul  just  as  heat 
is  to  fire.  On  the  contrary,  as  it  is  seen  in  the  world  that  a 
carpenter  feels  unhappy  when  working  as  an  agent  with  instru¬ 
ments  like  an  adze,  and  that  this  very  man  becomes  happy  when 
he  reaches  his  own  home  leaving  behind  the  instruments  like  the 
adze;  then  he  is  at  nobody’s  beck  and  call,  he  is  free  from 
worries,  and  free  from  all  activity;  similarly  the  soul  in  associa¬ 
tion  with  the  duality,  brought  about  by  nescience,  becomes  an 
agent  and  is  unhappy  in  the  dream  and  wakeful  states;  but  when 
for  becoming  free  from  that  fatigue,  that  very  soul  enters  into 
its  own  Self,  the  supreme  Brahman,  in  the  state  of  deep  sleep,  and 
becomes  free  from  the  assemblage  of  body  and  organs,  it  is  no 
more  an  agent,  and  it  becomes  happy.  So  also  in  the  state  of 
liberation  it  has  the  darkness  of  ignorance  dispelled  with  the  lamp 
of  knowledge,  and  becoming  the  absolute  Self,  it  attains  happi¬ 
ness.  The  point  in  the  illustration  of  the  carpenter  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  as  applying  merely  thus  far  that  the  carpenter  becomes  an 
agent  only  when  he  is  in  need  of  the  pre-requisites  like  the  adze 
etc.  for  the  set  works  of  planing  etc.  but  he  is  a  non-agent  in 
his  mere  physical  presence.  So  also  the  soul  becomes  an  agent 
only  when  it  requires  the  instruments  like  the  mind  etc.  for  all 
kinds  of  work;  but  considered  in  itself,  it  is  surely  not  an  agent. 
The  soul  has,  however,  no  limb  (like  the  hand)  with  which  to 
pick  up  or  put  aside  the  organs  (i.e.  instruments  of  work)  like 
the  mind  etc.,  just  as  the  carpenter  picks  up  or  puts  away  the 
adze  etc.  with  his  hands  etc. 

As  for  the  assertion  that  the  soul  must  have  agentship  for  such 
reasons  as  the  need  of  imparting  purposefulness  to  the  scripture, 
that  is  wrong.  When  the  scripture  imparts  injunction,  it  takes  for 
granted  the  conventional  agentship  and  then  teaches  about  partic¬ 
ular  forms  of  duty;  but  it  does  not  itself  prove  the  agentship  of 
the  soul.  Moreover,  we  stated  earlier  that  the  soul  has  no  agent- 
ship  intrinsically,  for  there  is  instruction  about  the  identity  of 
the  individual  Self  and  Brahman.  This  is  our  standpoint.  Hence 
any  injunctive  text  will  find  enough  scope  by  accepting  the  con¬ 
ventional  agentship  created  by  nescience.  Besides,  since  the  texts. 


II.  iii.  40]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  501 

such  as  this,  “The  Puru$a,  a  knower  by  nature,  is  a  doer”  (Pr. 
IV.  9),  which  are  mere  recapitulations  of  facts  already  known 
otherwise,  may  well  be  valid  as  merely  referring  to  the  empirical 
agentship  as  it  is  created  by  ignorance.  Hereby  are  refuted  the 
arguments  about  roaming  (II.  iii.  34),  and  taking  up  the  organs 
(II.  iii.  35),  for  they  too  are  mere  reiterations  (of  conventionally 
accepted  facts). 

Opponent :  Since  the  fact  of  roaming  about  by  the  soul  is  dealt 
with  by  saying  that  in  the  dream  state,  when  all  the  organs  have 
gone  asleep,  the  soul  moves  about  in  its  own  body  at  will  (Bj% 
II.  i.  18),  it  amounts  to  asserting  that  the  absolute  Self  has  agent- 
ship.  So  also  in  the  matter  of  taking  up  the  organs.  Since  the  text, 
“it  absorbs  at  the  time  the  power  of  perception  of  the  organs 
(vijmnam)  through  the  intellect  ( vijnanena )”  (Bf.  II.  i.  17),  the 
objective  and  instrumental  case-endings  are  used  after  the  organs 
(in  vijndnam  and  vijnanena),  therefore  we  are  led  to  the  conclu¬ 
sion  that  the  absolute  Self  has  agentship. 

Vedantin  :  In  answer  it  is  said:  As  for  the  dream  state,  there  is 
no  absolute  stoppage  of  the  use  of  the  organs  by  the  soul;  for  in 
the  text,  “Entering  the  dream  state  in  association  with  the  intel¬ 
lect,  he  (the  Self)  goes  beyond  this  world”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  7 — 
Madhyandina),  we  hear  of  the  association  with  the  intellect 
even  in  that  state.  So  also  in  the  Smjti:  “Know  that  to  be 
the  state  of  dream  experience,  where  after  the  stoppage  of 
the  organs,  the  mind  remains  active  and  experiences  the 
objects”.  Besides,  the  Upani$ad  declares  that  desire  etc.  are 
the  modes  of  the  mind  (Bj-.  I.  v.  3);  and  they  are  witness¬ 
ed  in  dream.  Therefore  the  soul  moves  about  in  dream  in 
association  with  the  mind.  The  roaming  there  also  is  not 
a  reality  but  only  a  product  of  past  impressions.  Thus  it  is 
that  the  Upani$ad  describes  the  dream  activities  by  qualifying 
them  with  the  phrase  “as  if”:  “He  seems  as  if  enjoying  himself 
in  the  company  of  women,  as  if  laughing  or  even  seeing  frightful 
tilings”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  13).  Ordinary  people  also  describe  the  dream 
experiences  in  a  similar  way:  “As  if  I  were  ascending  a  mountain 
peak”,  “As  if  I  saw  a  forest”.  Similarly  even  with  regard  to  the 
“taking  up  of  the  organs”,  although  the  objective  and  instru¬ 
mental  case-endings  are  used  after  the  organs  ( vijndna ),  still  the 


502  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  40 

soul’s  agentship  is  to  be  understood  as  occurring  as  a  result  of 
conjunction  with  them,  for  we  showed  earlier  that  there  can  be 
no  agentship  in  the  absolute  Self.  In  the  common  world  also,  the 
speaker’s  modes  of  expression  can  be  very  various,  as  for  instance, 
“The  warriors  are  fighting”,  or  “the  king  is  fighting  through  the 
warriors”.  Moreover,  in  this  case  of  “taking  up”  what  is  intended 
to  be  spoken  of  is  the  stoppage  of  the  activity  of  the  organs,  and 
not  the  independent  agentship  of  anyone  (i.e.  of  the  soul),  for 
even  when  somebody  goes  to  sleep  without  any  conscious  effort, 
the  organs  are  seen  to  stop  from  activity.24. 

As  for  the  allusion  to  the  statement,  “  Vijnana  spreads  the  sacri¬ 
fice”  (Tai.  II.  v.  1),  that  only  makes  us  understand  the  agentship 
of  the  intellect,  since  the  word  vijmtta  is  very  often  used  in  that 
sense,  since  it  is  mentioned  immediately  after  the  mind,  and  since 
in  the  text  “faith  is  indeed  his  head”  (Tai.  II.  iv),  such  limbs  as 
faith  etc.  are  declared  for  the  Self  identified  with  the  intellect, 
and  faith  etc.  are  well  known  to  be  the  modes  of  the  intellect. 
Moreover,  in  the  complementary  passage  occurs  the  sentence, 
“All  the  gods  worship  vijmna  (intellect),  the  eldest,  as  Brahman” 
(Tai.  II.  v.  1);  and  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  intellect 
(identified  with  Hiraijyagarbha)  is  the  eldest  or  the  first  born 
(Bf.  V.  iv.  1).  Besides,  this  is  confirmed  by  the  assertion  in 
another  Vedic  text  that  a  sacrifice  is  performed  by  the  organ  of 
speech  and  the  intellect:  “That  which  is  a  sacrifice  consists  in  a 
succession  of  speech  and  the  intellect  one  after  the  other.”25 

And  it  cannot  be  argued  that  if  the  organs  (including  the 
intellect)  are  assumed  to  be  the  agents,  then  there  will  be  a 
reversal  of  the  power  of  the  intellect  (from  instrumentality  to 
agentship — B.  S.  II.  iii.  38),  for  all  the  things  (even  though) 
appearing  with  different  case-endings  must  have  agentship  in 
their  own  respective  spheres  (of  actions).26  The  organs  become 

“In  the  earlier  argument  it  was  conceded  for  argument’s  sake  that  the 
soul  takes  up  the  organs  when  entering  sleep.  That  activity  too  is  denied 
here. 

25  The  sacrifice  emerges  from  mental  thought  followed  by  the  utterance 
of  mantras  through  speech.  Here  also  the  agent  of  the  sacrifice  is  the 
intellect. 

28  We  say,  “Rice  is  cooking”,  “fuel  is  burning”,  “the  vessel  contains” 


II.  iii.  41  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  503 

instruments  when  considered  from  the  standpoint  of  the  act  of 
perception;  but  the  perception  itself  is  by  the  soul.  Here,  again, 
the  soul  has  no  agency,  for  it  is  eternal  consciousness  by  its  very 
nature.  The  witnessing  soul  cannot  have  any  agentship  even 
through  the  ego-consciousness,  for  egoity  itself  is  an  object  of 
perception  to  the  soul.  Again,  if  this  position  is  accepted,  there 
will  be  no  need  for  fancying  some  other  organ;  for  the  intellect 
is  admitted  as  the  instrument. 

The  objection  that  scttmdhi  (profound  meditation)  would  not 
be  possible  (B.  S.  II.  iii.  39),  stands  refuted  through  the  refutation 
of  the  assertion  that  the  soul  must  be  an  agent  so  as  to  impart 
purposefulness  to  the  scripture  (B.  S.  II.  iii.  33),  for  samadhi  is 
enjoined  by  accepting  the  conventional  agentship.  Therefore  the 
conclusion  stands  firm  that  the  agentship  of  the  soul  is  a  creation 
of  the  limiting  adjuncts. 

Topic  16:  Soul’s  Agentship  Derived  from  God 

g  But  (derived  from)  the  Highest,  for  that  is 

declared  by  Vedic  texts. 

41.  But  the  agentship  (of  the  individual  sotd)  is  derived  from 
God,  for  that  is  v>hat  is  stated  in  the  Vedic  texts. 

Doubt :  It  has  been  said  that  the  agentship  of  the  individual 
soul  occurs  owing  to  the  limiting  adjuncts  during  the  state  of 
ignorance.  Now  it  has  to  be  considered  whether  that  agentship 
occurs  with  or  without  any  dependence  on  GocL 

Opponent :  Under  the  circumstances,  the  conclusion  arrived 
at  is  that  the  soul  does  not  depend  on  God  for  its  agentship. 

Why? 

Because  there  is  no  need  to  depend.  For  this  soul,  impelled  by 
likes,  dislikes,  etc.  and  endowed  with  all  the  other  paraphernalia 
of  action,  can  by  itself  have  experiences  of  agentship.  What  has 
God  to  do  for  it?  And  it  is  not  a  recognized  fact  in  the  world 

and  so  on.  The  fuel  is  an  agent  so  far  as  its  own  action  is  concerned, 
but  as  regards  cooking,  it  is  an  instrument. 


504  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iii.  41 

that  in  such  works  as  agriculture  one  has  need  of  God,  in  the 
sense  that  one  has  of  bullocks  etc.  Besides,  a  God,  who  creates 
creatures  and  endows  them  with  an  agentship  that  is  essentially 
painful,  will  be  open  to  the  charge  of  cruelty  as  well  as  partiality 
owing  to  ordaining  an  agentship  that  leads  to  unequal  results. 

Objection  :  Was  it  not  said  that  “No  partiality  and  cruelty  (can 
be  charged  against  God)  because  of  His  taking  other  factors  into 
consideration”  (B.  S.  II.  i.  34)? 

Opponent :  What  was  said  would  have  been  true  if  God  could 
possibly  depend  on  other  things;  and  that  dependence  would  be 
possible  for  God  if  the  creatures  could  possess  merit  and  demerit. 
These  again  would  have  been  possible  if  the  individual  souls  had 
agentship.  Now,  if  that  agentship  be  dependent  on  God,  then  on 
what  will  God  have  His  dependence?  (If  again  God  ordains 
without  dependence  on  results  of  action),  then  on  that  supposi¬ 
tion  the  individual  will  get  unmerited  fruits.  Hence  the  individual 
has  his  agentship  independently  and  naturally. 

Vedantin :  This  contingency  is  ruled  out  by  the  aphorist  by 
the  word  “but”,  and  his  own  position  is  stated  in  “the  agentship 
(etc.)”.  During  the  state  of  ignorance,  when  the  individual  soul 
is  blinded  by  the  darkness  of  ignorance  and  cannot  understand 
itself  to  be  different  from  the  assemblage  of  body  and  organs, 
it  derives  its  transmigratory  state,  consisting  in  its  becoming  an 
agent  and  experiencer,  from  the  behest  of  the  supreme  Self  who 
presides  over  all  activities  and  resides  in  all  beings,  and  who  is 
the  witness  (of  all),  imparts  intelligence  (to  all),  and  is  the 
supreme  Lord.  Liberation,  too,  results  from  realization  that  is 
vouchsafed  by  Him  out  of  His  grace. 

Why? 

That  is  what  is  stated  in  the  Vedic  texts.  Although  the  individ¬ 
ual  being  is  impelled  by  such  defects  as  attachment  and  is 
endowed  with  the  accessories  of  activity,  and  although  in 
ordinary  experience,  such  activities  as  agriculture  are  not  recog¬ 
nized  as  caused  by  God,  still  it  is  ascertained  from  the  Vedic 
texts  that  God  is  the  directing  (i.e.  ultimate  efficient)  cause 
behind  all  activities.  To  this  effect  occurs  the  text:  “It  is  He 
who  makes  him  do  good  works  whom  He  would  raise  above 
these  worlds,  and  it  is  He  who  makes  them  do  evil  works  whom 


II.  iii.  42  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  505 

He  would  drag  down”  (Kau,  III.  8),  as  also  “He  who  dwells  in 
the  sound  and  controls  the  soul  from  within”  (§.  B.  XIV.  vi.  7.30, 
Bf.  III.  vii.  3-23),  and  other  texts  of  this  kind. 

Opponent :  If  God  has  the  (ultimate)  power  of  directing  in 
this  way,  He  will  have  partiality  and  cruelty  and  the  individual 
beings  will  reap  unmerited  results. 

The  ( Vedantin's )  answer  is  given  in  the  negative: 

^  However  ^-sp^rr-apfcar:  dependent  on  the  efforts  made, 
fa%T-sifd on  grounds  of  the  enjoined  and 
prohibited  duties  not  becoming  meaningless  and  so  on. 

42.  (God  is),  however ,  dependent  on  the  efforts  made ,  so 
that  injunctions  and  prohibitions  may  not  become  meaningless 
and  other  defects  may  not  arise. 

The  word  “however”  is  used  for  refuting  the  objections 
raised.  In  causing  the  individual  to  act,  God  takes  into  account 
the  efforts — characterized  either  as  virtuous  or  vicious — which 
the  individual  makes.  Hence  the  defects,  pointed  out,  do  not 
arise.  God  acts  merely  as  a  general  instrumental  cause,  dividing 
the  resulting  fruits  of  works  unequally  in  accordance  with  the 
inequality  of  merit  and  demerit  acquired  by  the  individual 
beings,  even  as  rain  does.  It  is  seen  in  the  world  that  rain 
becomes  the  common  instrumental  cause  of  long  and  short 
creepers  etc.  or  of  rice  and  barley  etc.  which  grow  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  their  own  seeds,  and  yet  unless  there  be  rainfall,  they 
can  have  no  differences  in  sap,  flower,  fruit,  leaves,  etc.,  nor  can 
they  have  these  in  the  absence  of  their  own  seeds;  so  also  it 
stands  to  reason  that  God  ordains  good  and  bad  for  the  individ¬ 
ual  beings  in  accordance  with  the  efforts  made  by  the  beings 
themselves. 

Opponent :  If  the  agentship  itself  of  the  individual  be  depen¬ 
dent  on  God,  then  God  can  have  no  dependence  on  the  effort 
made  by  the  individual. 

Vedantin :  That  creates  no  difficulty.  Although  the  individ- 
uaPs  agentship  is  dependent  on  God,  still  it  is  the  individual 


506  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA5YA  [II.  iii.  42 

who  really  acts.  God  directs  him  just  as  he  himself  would  pro¬ 
ceed  with  his  work.  Moreover,  God  directs  him  now  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  what  he  did  previously,  and  He  directed  him  earlier  in 
accordance  with  what  he  had  done  still  earlier.  Thus  since  the 
state  of  transmigratory  existence  is  without  beginning,  all  this 
is  above  cavil. 

Opponent :  How  again  is  it  known  that  God  depends  on  the 
efforts  made? 

The  ( Vedantin's )  answer  is  contained  in,  “so  that  the  injunc¬ 
tions  and  prohibitions  may  not  become  meaningless  and  other 
defects  may  not  arise”.  For  thus  alone  such  injunctions  and 
prohibitions  as,  “One  desirous  of  heaven  shall  perform  a  sacri¬ 
fice”,  “A  Brahmaija  is  not  to  be  killed”,  will  not  be  stultified; 
else  (if  God  does  not  depend  on  the  acts  done,  then)  these  will 
become  meaningless,  and  God  Himself  will  be  installed  (as  an 
absolute  dictator)  in  the  place  of  injunction  and  prohibition, 
since  the  individual  will  be  absolutely  under  God  (and  not 
under  the  scriptures).  Similarly  (God  being  without  any 
standard),  He  will  strike  with  evil  one  who  acts  according  to 
scripture,  and  bestow  gifts  on  one  who  acts  against  it.  In  that 
case  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  will  be  set  aside.  Moreover,  if 
God  be  absolutely  autocratic,  even  ordinary  personal  efforts 
will  become  useless,  and  so  also  space,  time,  and  causation  will 
be  meaningless.  Furthermore,  there  will  be  the  defect  stated 
earlier  (of  getting  unmerited  results,  etc).  These  and  such 
other  drawbacks  are  indicated  by  the  term  “other  defects”. 

Topic  17:  Relation  of  Soul  and  God 

HHMM&lWrqtri  ^  ^  \\^\\ 

3fV:  A  part  because  mentioned  HHT  as  different, 

^  arfr  as  also  3Mqr  otherwise  q%  some  read  of 

identity  with  Dasas  (fishermen  and  slaves),  Kitavas 
(gamblers),  and  others. 

43.  (The  individual  souls  are)  parts  of  God  because  of  the 
mention  that  they  are  different,  also  because  some  read  other- 


II.iii.43]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  507 

'wise  of  (Brahman's)  identity  with  fishermen ,  slaves ,  gamblers y 
and  others . 

Doubt :  It  was  stated  earlier  that  as  between  the  individual 
soul  and  God,  there  exists  (a  relationship  based  on)  a  feeling  of 
one  being  the  favoured  and  the  other  the  favourer.  And  such  a 
relationship  is  seen  to  subsist  in  the  world  between  two  mutually 
related  entities,  as  for  instance  a  servant  and  his  master,  or  a 
fire  and  its  sparks.  Thus  when  it  is  admitted  that  the  individual 
and  God  are  mutually  the  beneficiary  and  the  benefactor,  the 
question  arises,  whether  their  relationship  is  like  that  between 
the  master  and  the  servant,  or  like  that  between  fire  and  its 
sparks. 

Opponent :  When  this  doubt  arises,  the  conclusion  may  be 
either  that  the  relationship  is  irregular,  or  since  the  feeling  as 
between  the  ruler  and  the  ruled  is  well  known  to  be  of  the 
pattern  subsisting  between  the  master  and  the  servant,  it  must 
be  similar  to  that  here  as  well. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  aphorist  says,  “A  part”  etc.  The  indi¬ 
vidual  should  be  a  part  of  God  even  as  a  spark  is  of  fire.  The 
individual  is  a  part  only  apparently,  for  the  partless  Brahman 
can  have  no  part  in  the  literal  sense. 

Opponent :  Why  should  not  the  individual  be  God  Himself 
on  this  very  ground  of  partlessness  (of  God)? 

Vedantin :  (No),  “because  of  the  mention  that  they  are 
different”.  Unless  there  is  some  dissimilarity,  the  statement  of 
difference,  as  contained  in,  “He  is  to  be  searched  for,  He  is  to 
be  sought  to  be  known”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  “Knowing  It  alone 
one  becomes  a  sage”  (Bjr.  IV.  iv.  22),  “He  who  dwells  in  the 
soul  and  controls  the  soul  from  within”  (§.  B.  XIV.  vi.  7),  and 
similar  texts,  cannot  be  justified. 

Oppone?it :  This  reference  to  difference  fits  in  more  aptly 
if  it  be  understood  to  be  like  that  between  a  master  and  his 
servant. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  aphorist  says:  “it  is  mentioned  other¬ 
wise  also”  etc.  Not  that  the  individual  is  known  merely  to  be.  a 
part  from  the  mention  of  difference.  What  else  then?  The 
mention  is  made  in  other  ways  also  to  establish  non-difference. 


508  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  43 

Thus  the  followers  of  a  certain  section  of  the  Atharva  Veda 
read  in  their  hymn  to  Brahman  of  the  identity  of  Brahman  with 
the  Dasasy  Kitovas ,  and  others  in,  “The  Ddsas  are  Brahman;  the 
Ddsas  are  Brahman;  even  these  gamblers  are  but  Brahman”  etc. 
The  Ddsas  are  the  people  known  as  Kaivartas  (fishermen);  the 
Ddsas  are  those  others  (i.e.  slaves)  who  surrender  their  bodies 
to  a  master;  and  ( kitavas  are)  those  others  who  are  the  gamblers 
engaged  in  playing  dice;  they  are  all  nothing  but  Brahman. 
With  the  help  of  these  illustrations  of  inferior  beings  the  text 
shows  that  all  individual  souls  are  Brahman,  who  have  entered 
into  the  aggregates  of  body  and  organs  created  by  name  and 
form.  Similarly  elsewhere  also,  when  dealing  with  Brahman 
Itself,  this  very  idea  is  elaborated:  “You  are  woman,  you  are 
man,  you  are  a  young  man  or  even  a  maid;  you  are  old  totter¬ 
ing  about  with  the  help  of  a  stick;  having  taken  birth,  you  have 
your  face  everywhere”  (Sv.  IV.  3),  and  “One  becomes  immor¬ 
tal  by  knowing  that  intelligent  One  who,  after  having  created 
all  the  forms  and  names,  (and  after  having  entered  there)  goes 
on  uttering  (i.e.  making  use  of)  them”  (Tai.  A.  III.  xii.  16). 
This  idea  finds  confirmation  from  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “There 
is  no  other  witness  but  Him”  (Bj\  III.  vii.  23).  And  conscious¬ 
ness  is  common  to  both  God  and  the  individual  beings  even  as 
heat  is  to  fire  and  a  spark.  Thus  since  both  difference  and  non¬ 
difference  are  known  (from  texts),  it  is  gathered  that  the  indi¬ 
vidual  is  a  part. 

Why,  again,  should  it  be  known  to  be  a  part? 

Hr5|ctufa  IIWIl 

^  And  on  the  authority  of  the  words  of  the 

viantras . 

44.  This  follows  from  the  words  of  the  mantras  also . 

The  mantra  text  also  reveals  this  fact:  “Thus  far  (i.e.  the 
whole  creation)  constitutes  His  glory;  Puru$a  (i.e.  the  infinite 
Being)  is  greater  even  than  that  (creation).  All  bhutas  (beings) 
are  merely  a  foot  (part)  of  His;  His  other  three  immortal  feet 
are  in  heaven”  (i.e.  transcendental)  (Ch.  III.  xii.  6).  By  bhutas 


II.  iii.  45  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA?YA  509 

(beings)  is  (suggestively)  indicated  here  everything  that  moves 
or  does  not  move,  the  living  creatures  being  the  most  prominent 
among  them;  for  we  come  across  such  a  use,  “(One  attains  the 
world  of  Brahman)  by  practising  non-injury  to  all  the  bhutas 
on  all  occasions  apart  from  where  the  scriptures  sanction  it” 
(Ch.  VIII.  xv.  1).  The  words  ctmla  (part),  p&da  (foot  or 
quarter)  are  synonymous  with  bhSga  (a  portion).  From  this 
also  the  individual  is  known  to  be  a  part. 

What  more  is  the  reason  for  knowing  it  to  be  a  part? 

3rfq  ^  IIVV.II 

arfa  Moreover  mention  is  made  in  the  Smrti. 

45.  And  this  is  also  stated  in  the  Smrti  (Gita), 

In  the  Bhagavad-Glta  also  (which  is  a  Smrti)  it  is  stated  that 
the  individual  is  a  part  of  God:  “An  eternal  portion  of  myself 
having  become  an  individual  soul  in  the  world  of  the  creatures” 
(XV.  7).  From  this  also  it  is  known  that  it  is  a  part.  As  for 
the  argument  that  in  common  experience  it  is  well  recognized 
that  the  relation  of  the  ruler  and  the  ruled  obtains  only  among 
such  persons  as  the  master  and  the  servant,  although  that  is  the 
well-known  fact  in  the  world,  still  it  is  ascertained  from  the 
scriptures  that  the  relationship  here  is  like  that  between  a  part 
and  a  whole  as  also  like  that  between  the  ruled  and  the  ruler. 
And  it  involves  no  contradiction  to  hold  that  God,  having  His 
unsurpassable  limiting  adjunct,  rules  over  the  individual  souls 
having  their  inferior  limiting  adjuncts. 

Here  the  ( opponent )  says:  If  the  individual  be  admitted  to 
be  a  part  of  God  who  is  the  whole,  then  God  will  have  to 
experience  the  pain  of  the  transmigratory  existence  suffered  by 
(all)  the  individuals,  even  as  in  the  ordinary  world,  Devadatta, 
possessed  of  his  own  hands,  feet,  etc.  suffers  pain  when  it  occurs 
to  any  one  of  the  limbs.  From  this  it  will  follow  that  those 
who  reach  Godhood  will  suffer  greater  pain;  and  as  compared 
with  this  liberation,  the  earlier  state  of  worldly  existence  will 
be  preferable,  so  that  the  predicament  will  arise  of  full  enlighten¬ 
ment  becoming  useless. 


510  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iii.  46 

Veddntin :  To  this  comes  the  reply: 

<TT:  The  supreme  Self  ^  does  not  (suffer)  thus  M^5r-3TTfe- 
^  like  light  etc. 

46.  The  Supreme  Self  is  not  so  (touched  by  the  suffering  of 
the  individual  soul)y  even  as  light  etc .  are  not  (affected  by  the 
things  that  condition  them). 

We  solemnly  declare  that  God  does  not  suffer  the  woes  of 
the  world  like  an  individual  being.  The  individual  soul,  under 
the  influence  of  ignorance,  seems  to  become  identified  with  the 
body  etc.,  and  it  suffers  the  sorrows  occurring  to  the  body, 
owing  to  its  belief  that  the  sufferings  created  by  ignorance  are 
its  own.  But  God  has  no  such  identity  with  the  body  etc.  nor 
any  conception  of  suffering  in  Himself.  In  the  case  of  the 
individual  soul  as  well,  the  feeling  of  suffering  that  it  has,  arises 
from  an  error  consisting  in  not  realizing  its  difference  from  the 
limiting  adjunct  constituted  by  the  body,  organs,  etc.  which 
are  created  by  name  and  form  that  are  the  products  of  igno¬ 
rance;  but  in  reality  it  has  no  suffering.  Just  as  a  man,  owing  to 
his  erroneous  identity  with  the  body,  feels  the  pain  caused  to 
his  body  by  a  burn,  a  bruise,  etc.,  so  also  he  feels  the  pain  caused 
to  his  son,  friend,  and  others,  owing  to  an  erroneous  identity 
with  them  under  the  idea,  “I  am  the  same  as  my  son”,  “I  am  the 
same  as  my  friend”,  arising  from  strong  attachment  to  the  son, 
friend,  etc.  caused  by  his  love  for  them.  From  this  it  becomes 
known  as  a  certainty  that  the  feeling  of  sorrow  is  caused  by  an 
error  of  false  identity.  And  this  is  understood  from  an  observa¬ 
tion  of  the  opposite  instances.  Thus  it  is  that  when  many  sit 
together — both  those  who  have  sons,  friends,  etc.  and  have  a 
feeling  of  relationship  with  them,  and  those  that  have  no  such 
conception — and  such  pieces  of  news  are  broken  that  a  son  is 
dead,  a  friend  is  dead,  and  so  on,  then  from  that  news,  sorrow 
comes  only  to  those  who  have  the  belief  of  having  friends  and 
sons,  but  not  to  those,  e.g.  monks  and  others  who  have  no 
such  belief.  Thus  since  complete  (i.e.  discriminating)  knowledge 


II.  iii.  47]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHAgYA  511 

is  seen  to  serve  some  purpose  even  for  a  man  under  ordinary 
circumstances,  what  more  need  we  speak  of  its  purposefulness 
in  the  case  of  one  who  does  not  see  anything  apart  from  the 
Self  which  is  never  an  object,  and  who  has  become  one  with 
what  is  by  nature  eternal  consciousness?  Hence  there  can  be 
no  question  of  complete  enlightenment  being  useless.  “As  light 
etc.”  is  said  by  way  of  an  illustration.  As  the  light  of  the  sun 
or  moon  spreads  over  the  whole  sky,  and  yet  when  it  comes 
in  contact  with  a  conditioning  factor  like  a  finger  etc.,  it  seems 
to  become  straight  or  bent  like  them  as  these  things  become  so, 
but  not  so  in  reality;  or  as  space  seems  to  move  when  pots  etc. 
change  places,  but  not  so  in  reality;  or  as  the  reflection  of  the 
sun  in  a  plate  of  water  etc.  seems  to  shake  with  the  shaking  of 
those  things,  but  not  so  the  sun  that  is  the  prototype;  similarly 
even  though  a  part  of  God,  which  is  conjured  up  by  nescience, 
conditioned  by  the  intellect  etc.,  and  called  an  individual  soul, 
suffers  pain,  still  God,  the  possessor  of  that  part,  has  no  suffer¬ 
ing.  And  we  said  that  even  the  suffering  of  the  individual  being 
is  brought  about  by  ignorance.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Upani§adic 
texts,  as  for  instance,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  estab¬ 
lish  the  soul’s  identity  with  Brahman  Itself  through  a  negation 
of  the  state  of  individuality  caused  by  ignorance.  Hence  there 
can  be  no  question  of  God  becoming  afflicted  with  pain  owing 
to  the  individual’s  suffering. 

Wfcl  ^  HW9II 

gsrefof  They  say  in  the  Smjids  and. 

47.  They  say  so  in  the  Smrtis,  and  (the  Upanifads  declare 
thus). 

Moreover,  Vyasa  and  others  recollect  (i.e.  mention)  (in  their 
Smjtis),  how  the  supreme  Self  is  not  afflicted  by  the  suffering 
of  the  individual  being:  “Among  these  two,  that  which  is  the 
supreme  Self  is  stated  to  be  eternal  and  without  attributes;  and 
like  the  lotus  leaf  unaffected  by  water,  It  remains  untouched 
even  by  the  results  of  work.  The  other  one  that  is  the  basis  of 
all  works,  is  subject  to  bondage  and  liberation,  and  it  is  he  that 


512  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  [II.  iii.  47 

becomes  again  associated  with  the  (subtle  body  constituted  by) 
the  seventeen  factors.”27  By  the  word  “and”  (in  the  aphorism) 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  “the  Upani$ads  also  state  this”,  for 
instance,  “Of  these  two,  the  one  eats  the  fruit  of  divergent  taste, 
and  the  other  looks  on  without  eating”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1,  §v.  iv.  6), 
and  “Similarly  the  Self,  that  is  but  one  in  all  beings,  is  not 
tainted  by  the  sorrows  of  the  world,  It  being  transcendental” 
(Ka.  II.  ii.  11). 

Somebody  (an  opponent)  says  here:  If  then  the  innermost 
Self  of  all  beings  be  the  same,  then  how  will  acquiescence  and 
inhibition  (i.e.  injunction  and  prohibition) — both  scriptural  and 
human — fit  in? 

Objection :  Has  it  not  been  said  that  the  individual  soul  is  a 
part  of  God?  And  because  of  this  difference  among  them  (i.e. 
God  and  His  various  parts),  injunction  and  prohibition,  which 
centre  round  this  difference,  can  well  maintain  their  distinction. 
So  what  is  the  point  in  your  question  here? 

The  answer  (of  the  Opponent)  is  this:  This  cannot  be  so,  for 
the  Vedic  texts,  speaking  of  non-difference,  establish  the  other 
fact  also  that  the  individual  is  not  a  part,  as  in,  “After  creating 
it,  He  entered  into  it”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1),  “There  is  no  other  witness 
but  Him”  (Br.  III.  vii.  23),  “He  goes  from  death  to  death,  who 
sees  difference  as  it  were,  in  It”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  19),  “That  thou 
art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi),  “I  am  Brahman”  (Br.  I.  iv.  10),  and 
other  passages  of  the  same  class. 

Vedantin :  Was  it  not  said  that  from  coming  across  both 
difference  and  non-difference  (in  the  texts),  the  conclusion  to 
be  arrived  at  is  that  the  individual  is  a  part? 

Opponent:  This  could  be  so  if  both  difference  and  non¬ 
difference  were  intended  as  facts  to  be  established;  but  it  is 
non-difference  alone  that  is  sought  to  be  taught  here,  for  the 
highest  human  goal  is  achieved  through  the  realization  of  the 
identity  of  the  individual  soul  with  Brahman.  The  difference, 
comprehended  empirically,  is  referred  to  only  by  way  of  a 
restatement  of  a  known  fact.  And  it  was  said  that  the  individual 
cannot  be  a  part  of  Brahman  in  the  literal  sense,  for  Brahman 

"Ten  organs  of  perception  and  action,  five  vital  forces,  mind,  and 
intellect. 


n.  iii.  48]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  513 

is  partless.  Hence  it  is  the  same  supreme  Self,  which  is  the  inner¬ 
most  Self  of  all  beings,  that  assumes  the  state  of  the  individual 
souls.  This  being  the  position,  the  logicality  of  injunction  and 
prohibition  has  to  be  explained. 

Vedantin :  That  is  being  explained  by  us: 

arflrtwftglfl  1 1^1 1 

(scriptural)  acquiescence  and  inhibition  (are 
feasiole)  owing  to  association  with  the  body 

as  in  the  case  of  light  etc. 

48.  Injunction  and  prohibition  become  effective  ov)ing  to 
physical  association ,  just  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  light  etc . 

“One  shall  approach  one’s  wife  at  the  proper  time”  is  an 
injunction;  “One  shall  not  approach  one’s  teacher’s  wife”  is  a 
prohibition.  Similarly,  “One  shall  sacrifice  an  animal  to  Agni 
and  Soma”  is  an  injunction;  “One  shall  not  injure  any  being” 
is  a  prohibition.  So  also  in  common  life,  “One  shall  entertain 
one’s  friend”  is  an  injunction;  “One  shall  avoid  one’s  enemy” 
is  a  prohibition.  Even  though  the  Self  is  one,  this  kind  of  injunc¬ 
tion  and  prohibition  are  possible  owing  to  “physical  associa¬ 
tion”.  “Physical  association”  means  the  contact  with  different 
bodies. 

What  is  this  bodily  contact? 

It  consists  in  a  rise  of  a  perverse  idea  to  the  effect,  “This 
aggregate  of  body  etc.  is  but  myself”.  This  is  seen  to.  exist  in 
all  creatures  and  to  take  such  forms  as:  “I  go”,  “I  come”,  “I  am 
blind”,  “I  am  not  blind”,  “I  am  dull”,  “I  am  not  dull”,  and  so 
on.  There  is  nothing  else  apart  from  full  enlightenment  that 
can  eradicate  this.  Before  the  dawn  of  that  enlightenment,  this 
error  permeates  all  creatures.  In  this  way,  even  though  the  Self 
is  admitted  to  be  one,  still  injunction  and  prohibition  can  find 
scope  owing  to  the  distinctions  created  through  the  association 
with  the  limiting  adjuncts  like  the  body  etc.,  conjured  up  by 
ignorance. 

Opponent :  In  that  case,  injunction  and  prohibition  are  mean¬ 
ingless  for  one  who  is  fully  enlightened. 

33 


514 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[II.iii.48 


Vedantin :  No,  for  he  is  beyond  the  range  of  scriptural 
direction,  as  he  has  already  got  all  that  can  be  achieved.  One 
who  has  to  be  directed  will  be  directed  with  regard  to  some¬ 
thing  to  be  avoided  or  something  to  be  accepted.  But  how  can 
one  be  directed  who  does  not  see  anything  other  than  the  Self? 
Not  that  the  Self  can  be  asked  to  be  engaged  in  action  on 
Itself. 

Opponent :  It  is  precisely  one  who  knows  that  the  Self  is 
different  from  the  body  that  can  be  directed  (by  the  scrip¬ 
tures). 

Vedantin :  No,  for  (such  fitness  for  injunction  follows  when) 
one  has  still  a  notion  that  one  is  the  aggregate  of  body  etc.28 
Though  it  is  true  that  one  is  directed  (by  the  scriptures)  only 
when  one  knows  (intellectually)  the  Self  to  be  different  from 
the  body,  still  only  that  person  alone  can  have  the  idea  that  he 
is  being  directed  (by  the  scriptures)  who  does  not  realize  the 
Self  to  be  (actually)  dissociated  from  body  etc.  even  as  space 
etc.  (are  from  jar  etc.).  For  nobody  who  understands  the  Self 
to  be  dissociated  from  the  body  etc.  is  ever  seen  to  come  under 
the  range  of  direction,  what  to  speak  of  one  who  realizes  the 
unity  of  the  Self?  And  it  cannot  be  said  that  if  the  man  of 
enlightenment  is  beyond  all  (scriptural)  obligation,  he  may  as 
well  behave  capriciously;  for  it  is  self-identity  (with  body  etc.) 
that  is  seen  to  promote  action  everywhere,  but  in  the  case  of 
the  enlightened  one  there  is  no  such  self-identity.  Therefore 
injunction  and  prohibition  become  possible  only  as  a  result  of 
association  with  the  body,  “as  it  is  in  the  case  of  light”.  As  fire 
from  the  cremation  ground  is  avoided,  but  not  the  others, 
though  as  fire  they  are  all  the  same;  as  sunlight  falling  on  an 
unholy  place  is  avoided,  but  not  so  the  sunlight  on  holy 
ground,  though  as  sunlight  it  is  all  the  same;  as  diamonds,  beryls, 
etc.,  which  are  particles  of  earthly  matter,  are  accepted,  but 
not  so  human  corpses  etc.,  though  they  are  equally  earthly 
things;  as  also  the  urine  and  dung  of  a  cow  are  accepted,  (the 

®An  intellectual  conception  of  the  difference  between  the  body  and 
soul  cannot  remove  the  notion  of  the  identity  with  the  body  that  one 
actually  has.  Till  that  notion  is  removed  by  direct,  actual  realization,  one 
is  well  within  scriptural  domination. 


II.  iii.  50]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  515 

cow  being  holy),  but  not  so  the  excreta  of  other  species;  so 
also  is  the  case  here. 


IIVg.ll 

^  And  3RRT^:  on  account  of  want  of  connection  araifafrC 
there  is  no  intermixture. 

49.  And  there  is  no  intermixture  (of  actions  and  results )> 
since  the  soul  has  no  connection  with  all  (the  bodies ). 

Opponent :  Conceded  that  injunction  and  prohibition  will  be 
possible  owing  to  the  association  with  particular  bodies  even 
though  the  Self  be  the  same.  But  as  regards  the  association  with 
the  results  of  work,  it  will  all  become  a  jumble  on  the  assump¬ 
tion  of  a  single  Self,  for  the  possessor  (of  experiences)  will  be 
but  one. 

Veddntin:  This  will  not  be  so,  because  the  connection  is  nor 
universal.  The  soul,  either  as  an  agent  or  as  an  experiencer,  has 
no  connection  with  all  the  bodies.  For  it  has  been  stated  that 
the  individual  soul  is  dependent  on  its  limiting  adjunct.  As  this 
limiting  adjunct  does  not  spread  everywhere,  so  also  the  soul 
has  no  universal  connection.  Thus  there  can  be  no  intermixture 
of  either  works  or  their  results. 

3TFTRI  ^  l|*o|| 

^  And  arpTRT:  a  false  appearance  (i.e.  reflection)  trer  cer¬ 
tainly. 

50.  And  (the  individual  soul)  is  only  a  reflection  (of  the 
supreme  Self)  to  be  sure. 

And  it  is  to  be  understood  that  this  individual  soul  is  a  reflec¬ 
tion  of  the  supreme  Self  like  the  semblance  of  the  sun  in  water. 
Not  that  the  soul  is  the  Self  Itself,  nor  is  it  something  else,. 
From  this  also  it  follows  that  just  as  when  any  one  of  the 
reflections  of  the  sun  moves,  the  others  do  not,  similarly  when 
any  one  individual  soul  becomes  associated  with  the  result  of 
its  work,  no  other  soul  is  associated  with  it.  Thus  the  works 


516 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[Il.iii.  50 


and  the  results  of  works  do  not  certainly  get  intermixed.  And 
since  a  false  appearance  is  a  creation  of  ignorance,  it  is  but 
logical  that  the  transmigratory  state  centring  round  that  appear¬ 
ance  must  also  be  a  creation  of  ignorance;  and  hence  the  instruc¬ 
tion  is  logically  proper  that  the  identity  of  the  soul  with 
Brahman,  which  is  the  supreme  reality,  is  attained  by  eradicating 
that  appearance.  On  the  contrary,  this  intermixture  (of  works 
and  results)  arises  in  the  case  of  those  only  who  believe  in 
many  souls,  each  one  of  which  is  omnipresent. 

How? 

“The  souls  are  many  and  omnipresent,  and  by  nature  they 
are  consciousness,  devoid  of  qualities,  and  unexcelled.  For 
serving  their  purposes  they  have  in  common  one  primordial 
Nature  (Pradhana).  And  the  experiences  (of  happiness  and 
sorrow)  as  well  as  liberation  accrue  to  these  souls  from  that 
Nature” — This  is  what  the  Samkhyas  say. 

(The  VaiSefikas  maintain  that)  although  the  souls  are  many 
and  omnipresent,  still  they  are  intrinsically  unconscious,  and 
are  mere  substances  like  pots,  walls,  etc.  The  minds  which  serve 
them  are  atomic  and  unconscious.  That  being  so,  from  a  contact 
of  the  substance  called  soul  and  the  substance  called  mind, 
emerge  nine  distinct  qualities  of  the  soul,  viz  desire  and  the  rest,29 
and  they  inhere  individually  in  the  soul  without  getting  inter¬ 
mixed.  This  is  the  transmigratory  state.  The  absolute  .cessation 
of  the  emergence  of  those  nine  qualities  of  the  soul  is  liberation. 
This  is  the  view  of  the  followers  of  Kaijada  (i.e.  Vai$e$ikas). 

Of  these  two  views,  as  regards  that  of  the  Samkhyas,  since 
all  the  souls  are  consciousness  by  nature  and  the  proximity  of 
Pradhana  is  common  to  them  all,  when  any  one  of  them  becomes 
associated  with  happiness  or  sorrow,  all  the  others  become 
equally  so. 

Sdmkhya :  It  may  be  like  this:  Since  Nature  acts  for  the 
liberation  of  the  souls,  some  individual  differentiation  (or 
adjustment)  will  be  made  (by  her),  for  else  the  activity  of 
Nature  will  amount  merely  to  a  display  of  her  own  glory,  and 
in  that  case  there  will  be  no  liberation. 

29  Intelligence,  happiness,  sorrow,  desire,  dislike,  effort,  merit,  demerit, 
and  impression. 


ILiii.  51]  BRAHMA  - SCTRA  - BHA§YA  517 

Vedantin:  This  is  vain  talk,  for  it  is  not  possible  to  under¬ 
stand  any  such  individual  adjustment  required  (on  utilitarian 
grounds)  for  the  fulfilment  of  (individual)  desired  ends.  The 
adjustment  has,  therefore,  to  be  explained  on  the  basis  of  some 
valid  reason.30  In  the  absence  of  any  reason,  however,  the 
desired  liberation  of  the  soul  may  very  well  remain  unaccom¬ 
plished,  while  the  intermixture  becomes  inevitable  owing  to 
the  absence  of  any  valid  ground  for  individual  adjustment. 

Even  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  followers  of  Kagada, 
whenever  the  mind  becomes  connected  with  any  one  of  the 
souls,  it  will  have  connection  with  the  other  souls  also  without 
obstacle,  for  (the  causes  for  that  connection,  viz)  proximity, 
etc.  are  equally  in  evidence,  (the  souls  being  omnipresent). 
From  this  indistinguishability  of  cause,  the  result  also  will  be 
indistinguishable,  and  so  from  the  contact  of  one  soul  with 
happiness  and  sorrow  all  the  other  souls  will  be  open  to  these. 

The  opponents  may  argue  that  the  individual  adjustment  will 
follow  from  the  unseen  potential  results  of  work.  But  the 
aphorist  says,  no — 


TOiPwmq  iivuii 

Since  the  unseen  potential  results  of  works 
cannot  be  allocated  individually. 

51.  (Even  the  unseen  potential  results  of  works  cannot  regu¬ 
late  individual  allocation ),  since  the  unseen  potential  results 
(themselves)  cannot  be  allocated  thus. 

The  unseen  potential  results  of  works,  consisting  in  merit  and 
demerit,  are  earned  (individually)  through  mind,  speech,  and 
body,  even  though  the  souls  continue  to  be  many,  all-pervasive 
like  space,  and  equally  contiguous  to  every  body,  in  and  out. 
Now  then,  from  the  Samkhya  standpoint,  there  is  nothing  to 

80  Inert  Nature  cannot  study  the  desires  of  the  souls;  and  the  liberation 
that  is  still  in  the  womb  of  futurity  and  is  itself  inert  cannot  give  rise 
to  any  individual  adjustment.  Hence  this  adjustment  is  accepted  by  you 
not  from  the  point  of  view  of  any  valid  reason,  but  from  that  of  utility 
for  serving  an  unproved  hypothesis. 


518 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[II.  iii.  51 


regulate  the  experiencing  of  happiness  and  sorrow  by  each  soul 
individually,  since  the  unseen  potential  results  do  not  inhere  in 
the  soul  (the  soul  being  attributeless),  but  they  abide  in 
Nature,  which  again  is  common  to  all.  The  same  fault  arises  in 
the  case  of  the  followers  of  Kaijada  as  well,  since  the  unseen 
potential  results  are  brought  about  by  contacts  between  the 
souls  and  mind  which  (contacts)  are  common  to  all,  just  as 
much  as  in  the  earlier  case,  so  that  there  is  no  reason  to  main¬ 
tain  any  such  rule  that  a  particular  result  will  belong  to  a 
particular  soul. 

The  (Vaise$ika)  opponent  may  argue  thus:  Such  resolves  etc. 
as,  “I  shall  get  this  result”,  “I  shall  avoid  this”,  “I  shall  make 
such  effort”,  “I  shall  act  thus”,  and  so  on,  which  spring  in  each 
soul  individually  will  regulate  the  mastery  of  the  souls  over 
their  (respective)  unseen  results. 

But  the  aphorist  says,  no — 

11X311 

3ffg  Even  t*ie  case  °f  resolution  etc.  ^  also 

it  is  the  same. 

52.  And  the  same  ( defect  springs  up)  even  in  the  case  of 
resolves  etc . 

Since  resolves  etc.  are  also  made  in  the  proximity  of  all  the 
(omnipresent)  souls  through  a  contact  between  a  soul  and  the 
mind  (which  contact  becomes)  common  to  all,  therefore  these 
resolves  etc.  cannot  be  logically  accepted  as  regulating  the 
allocation  (of  pleasure  and  pain).  And  hence  the  defect  pointed 
out  will  certainly  arise. 

On  the  basis  of  different  parts  ffa  if  this  be  the 
position,  not  so,  3r?cf:-'*TRT^  because  of  getting  included 
(in  all). 

53.  If  it  be  said  that  this  (individual  allocation  of  pleasure  and 
pain)  can  be  possible  in  accordance  with  the  separate  part  (of 


II.iii.53]  BRAHMA -S0TRA-BHA5YA  519 

each  soul  in  each  body),  then  it  cannot  be  so,  because  of  all 
(the  omnipresent  souls )  getting  included  in  all  (the  bodies). 

Opponent :  It  may  now  be  argued  that  though  the  individual 
soul  is  omnipresent,  still  its  contact  with  the  mind,  residing  in 
the  body,  will  happen  in  a  particular  part  of  that  soul  that  is 
circumscribed  by  that  body,  and  thus  the  allocation  of  resolves 
etc.,  unseen  potential  results  of  works,  and  happiness  and  sorrow 
will  be  encompassed  in  relation  to  that  part. 

Vedantin :  Even  that  is  not  valid. 

Why? 

“Because  of  getting  included  (everywhere)”.  Since  all  the 
individual  souls  are  equally  omnipresent,  they  become  included 
in  all  the  bodies.  That  being  the  case,  it  is  impossible  for  the 
Vaise$ikas  to  imagine  any  part  of  a  soul  that  becomes  separated 
by  a  body.  And  even  if  this  be  imagined,  that  part  of  the  part- 
less  soul  will  not  be  able  to  regulate  (the  allocation  of)  actual 
effects,  this  separation  having  existence  merely  in  imagination. 
And  the  body,  coming  into  being  as  it  does  in  the  vicinity  of 
all  the  souls,  cannot  be  assigned  to  any  particular  soul  rather 
than  to  all  the  others.  Even  if  a  difference  of  parts  (in 
souls)  be  accepted,  still  (such  parts  cannot  determine  the 
allocation  of  experience;  for)  two  souls,  having  in  store  for 
them  the  same  happiness  and  sorrow  may  at  times  have  those 
experiences  through  a  single  body,  since  it  is  possible  for  the 
two  souls  to  have  an  unseen  (potential)  result  bound  up  with 
the  same  locality.  Thus  when  Devadatta’s  body  moves  away 
from  a  locality  where  Devadatta  had  experienced  happiness  and 
sorrow,  and  then  Yajnadatta’s  body  moves  into  the  same  place, 
he  is  seen  to  have  the  same  kind  of  happiness  and  sorrow  as  the 
former;  that  would  not  be  the  case  unless  Devadatta  and 
Yajnadatta  had  an  unseen  potential  result  (in  store  for  them) 
bound  up  with  the  same  locality.  And  the  possibility  of  not 
enjoying  heaven  etc.  also  arises  from  the  standpoint  of  one  who 
talks  of  parts  in  the  soul;  for  (there  must  be  a  unity  of  the 
agent  and  enjoyer;  but  according  to  your  theory)  the  unseen 
potential  results  of  works  may  be  earned  in  the  Brahmaoa  bodies 
etc.,  whereas  the  heavenly  enjoyment  etc.  have  to  occur  in  a 


520  BRAHMA- SOTRA-BHA5YA  [ILiii.53 

different  locality.81  Moreover  if  the  souls  be  many,  they  cannot 
be  all-pervasive,  since  there  is  no  such  illustration  to  prove  this. 
Cite  for  me  then  those  (illustrative)  things  that  are  many  at  the 
same  time  that  they  occupy  the  same  place. 

Opponent:  Take  for  instance  colour,  (taste,  smell),  etc. 
(existing  in  the  same  flower). 

Ved&ntm :  No,  for  they  too  are  non-different  so  far  as  they 
are  identical  with  the  substance  to  which  they  belong;  and  in 
themselves  they  have  distinct  characteristics.  But  the  many 
souls  have  no  distinctive  characteristics.82 

Opponent:  The  difference  is  possible  owing  to  the  presence 
of  an  ultimate  viie$a  (inherent  differentia)  in  the  souls. 

Ved&ntin :  No,  since  the  supposition  of  difference  in  the  souls 
(resulting  from  the  inherent  differentia)  and  the  inference  of 
such  differentia  (on  the  strength  of  the  differences  among  the 
souls)  would  lead  to  a  logical  seesaw.  Moreover,  even  the 
omnipresence  of  space  etc.  is  unacceptable  to  the  believers  in 
Brahman,  since  these  are  understood  by  them  to  be  products. 
Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  all  defects  can  be  obviated  only  by 
those  who  believe  in  the  unity  of  the  Self. 


nAny  part  of  the  soul,  determined  by  the  body,  as  also  the  contact 
between  mind  and  soul,  is  common  to  all  souls,  they  being  omnipresent. 
So  any  particular  body  can  determine  the  parts  for  all  the  souls,  and 
any  mind  can  be  in  contact  with  all  the  souls.  Thus  experiences  cannot 
be  kept  distinct.  Even  an  unseen  potential  result  does  not  mend  matters, 
for  the  part  of  the  soul  where  this  result  arises  does  not  move  about; 
and  if  this  fixity  be  conceded,  then  it  has  to  be  admitted  that  other  souls 
can  have  the  same  experiences  at  that  very  locality,  for  that  is  what  we 
see  in  ordinary  life.  Moreover,  that  particular  part  being  motionless,  the 
result  acquired  in  a  Brahmana  body  cannot  move  to  heaven  for  fruition. 

*  Odour  is  nothing  but  its  own  material,  viz  the  element  “light”;  smell 
is  nothing  bur  “earth”,  taste  is  nothing  but  “water”;  and  so  on.  Apart 
from  these  substances,  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  flower.  Besides,  colour, 
taste,  etc.  differ  among  themselves,  but  not  so  the  souls,  which  have  the 
same  characteristics.  Thus  the  illustration  falls  through. 


Section  IV 


Topic  1:  Origin  of  the  Pranas 

Introduction:  In  the  third  section  was  resolved  the  conflict 
among  the  Vedic  texts  about  (the  creation  of)  space,  etc.  In  the 
fourth  section  is  now  being  resolved  the  conflict  about  pranas 
(organs).1  Now  then,  in  such  contexts  dealing  with  creation  as, 
“That  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  “From  that  Self  that  is  such 
emerged  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  and  others,  the  origin  of  the 
pranas  (organs)  is  not  mentioned.  Again  in  some  contexts,  their 
origin  itself  is  denied,  as  in,  “This  was  but  non-existence  in  the 
beginning”  (Tai.  II.  vii).  (This  is  not  nihilism;)  for  in,  “With 
regard  to  that  they  asked,  ‘What  is  it  that  was  non-existent?’ 
The  ffis  themselves  were  non-existent  in  the  beginning.  With 
regard  to  that  they  asked,  ‘Who  were  the  rsis ?’  The  pranas 
were  the  r$is”  (§.  B.  VI.  i.  1.1),  we  hear  of  the  existence  of  the 
prdyas  even  before  creation  started.  In  .other  places,  however, 
the  origin  of  the  organs  as  well  is  stated,  as  in,  “As  from  a 
blazing  fire  tiny  sparks  fly  in  all  directions,  so  from  this  Self 
emanate  all  the  pranas  (organs)”  (Bj\  II.  i.  20).  “From  Him 
originates  Prana  (vital  force)  as  well  as  the  mind,  all  the  senses, 
(space,  air,  fire,  water,  and  earth  that  supports  everything)” 
(Mu.  II.  i.  3),  “From  Him  emerge  the  seven  pranas  (sense- 
organs)”  (Mu.  II.  i.  8),  “He  created  Prdna ,  from  Prow  He 
created  faith,  space,  air,  fire,  water,  earth,  organs,  mind,  food” 
(Pr.  VI.  4),  and  other  places.  Since  a  textual  conflict  is  obvious 
in  those  places,  and  since  it  is  not  possible  to  discover  any  reason 
for  adopting  either  of  the  two  alternatives,  the  result  is  bound 
to  be  a  non-comprehension  of  the  meaning;  or  since  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  organs  before  creation  is  mentioned  by  the  texts, 
the  conclusion  may  be  that  the  texts  speaking  of  the  origin  of 

*The  creation,  nature,  and  number  of  pranas  will  be  decided.  The 
word  prana  has  several  meanings,  of  which  three  will  be  considered  in 
this  section — organs,  vital  force  in  each  individual,  and  Prana  in  its  cosmic 
aspect. 


522  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [Il.iv.l 

the  organs  are  to  be  taken  in  a  secondary  sense.  Hence  the  answer 
is  given  in  the  aphorism: 


twr  sm\:  \\\\\ 

<PTT  Similarly  sn*lT:  the  pranas  (organs). 

/.  Similarly  the  organs  (are  produced  from  the  supreme  Self). 

Opponent :  How  again  does  the  word  “similarly”  fit  in  here, 
since  nothing  is  presented  by  way  of  an  illustration,  (this  being 
only  the  beginning  of  a  section)?  The  topic  dealt  with  at  the 
end  of  the  section  just  preceding  was  the  refutation  of  the 
theory  that  the  souls  are  all-pervasive  and  many.  That,  however, 
cannot  serve  the  purpose  of  an  illustration,  since  there  is  no 
similarity.  Something  can  serve  as  an  illustration  when  it  has 
similarity,  as  for  instance,  “Balavarman  is  like  a  lion”.  It  may 
be  argued  (by  some  one)  thus:  “The  word  ‘similarly’  is  meant 
for  showing  the  similarity  with  unseen  potential  results  (occur¬ 
ring  at  the  end  of  the  last  section);  the  meaning  being  that  the 
organs  originating  in  the  vicinity  of  all  the  all-pervasive  souls 
cannot  be  allocated  to  any  particular  soul,  just  as  much  as  the 
unseen  potential  results  originating  in  the  vicinity  of  all  the 
all-pervasive  souls  cannot  be  assigned  to  any  one  of  them”.  But 
since  that  position  has  been  already  dealt  with  by  saying  that 
the  bodies  cannot  be  assigned  to  the  souls  individually,  (the 
souls  being  all  omnipresent),  a  fresh  consideration  will  mean 
a  mere  repetition.  Moreover,  the  organs  cannot  be  compared 
with  the  souls,  for  that  would  be  going  against  the  accepted 
point  of  view,  inasmuch  as  it  was  stated  that  the  souls  are  not 
produced,  whereas  the  intention  here  is  to  speak  of  the  creation 
of  the  organs.  Hence  the  word  ‘similarly’  seems  to  be  inappro¬ 
priate. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  a  relation  (of  ‘similarity’)  can  be  estab¬ 
lished  even  with  the  illustration  presented  in  the  illustrative 
(scriptural)  sentences  themselves.  The  illustration  in  the  present 
case  is  contained  in  the  texts  speaking  of  the  origin  of  the 
organs,  as  for  instance,  “From  this  Self  emanate  all  the  organs, 
all  worlds,  all  gods,  and  all  beings”  (Bj\  II.  i.  20),  and  similar 


II.  iv.  2  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  523 

others.  The  meaning  in  those  texts  is  that  the  organs  originate 
from  the  supreme  Brahman  just  like  the  worlds  etc.  So  also  in 
the  text,  “From  Him  originates  Prana ,  as  well  as  the  mind,  all 
the  organs,  space,  air,  fire,  water,  and  the  earth  that  supports 
everything”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3),  as  also  in  similar  others,  it  is  to  be 
understood  that  the  organs  originate  like  space  etc.  Or  it  may 
be  like  this.  Just  as  Jaimini  relies  on  a  connection  with  a 
remote  example  in  such  places  as  in  the  aphorism,  “When  one 
vomits  after  drinking  in  the  course  of  a  Vedic  sacrifice,  the 
remedy  is  to  be  undertaken  in  the  same  way  as  when  a  fault 
arises  from  giving  away  a  defective  horse  in  a  sacrifice”  (Jai. 

III.  iv.  32),  (so  also  Vyasa  can  do  likewise).  Just  as  it  is  under¬ 
stood  that  space  etc.,  spoken  of  in  the  previous  and  other 
sections  are  the  products  of  Brahman,  so  also  the  organs  are 
the  products  of  the  supreme  Brahman.  This  is  how  it  is  to  be 
construed. 

Opponent :  What  again  is  the  reason  for  accepting  the  organs 
as  products? 

Vedantin :  The  very  fact  that  the  Upani$ads  mention  this. 

Opponent:  Was  it  not  pointed  out  that  in  some  places  the 
origin  of  the  organs  is  not  spoken  of? 

Vedantin :  That  conclusion  is  wrong,  since  origin  is  spoken 
of  in  other  places;  for  any  omission  in  mentioning  something 
somewhere  cannot  rule  out  the  mention  made  elsewhere.  Hence 
it  is  well  affirmed  that  since  there  are  Vedic  mentions  of  origin, 
the  organs  originate  even  as  space  etc.  do. 

It  was  argued  that  since  the  texts  mention  the  existence  of 
the  pranas  (organs)  before  creation,  therefore,  any  text  that 
speaks  of  the  origin  of  the  organs,  must  be  taken  in  a  secondary 
sense.  That  position  is  refuted  in: 

IRII 

ifbjft.3Tqi.^cn^  Because  of  the  impossibility  (of  the  text  about 
origin)  in  the  metaphorical  sense. 

2.  (Origin  of  the  organs  has  to  be  accepted)  because  of  the 
impossibility  of  (the  text  about  origin  having)  the  secondary 
sense . 


524  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iv.  2 

The  compound  in  gaunyasambhavat  is  formed  by  dropping 
the  sixth  case-ending  after  gaunt  (meaning  thereby:  “Because  of 
the  impossibility  of  the  secondary  use”).  The  text  speaking  of 
the  origin  of  the  organs  cannot  have  a  secondary  sense,  for  that 
would  lead  to  an  abandonment  of  the  general  assertion.  The 
assertion  of  the  knowledge  of  all  through  a  knowledge  of  one  is 
contained  in,  “O  adorable  sir,  (which  is  that  thing)  which 
having  been  known  all  this  becomes  known?”  (Mu.  I.  i.  3);  and 
for  propounding  that  assertion  it  is  stated:  “From  Him  originates 
Prana  etc.”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3).  If  the  whole  of  this  creation  starting 
from  Prana  be  a  product  of  Brahman,  then  only  can  that  asser¬ 
tion  become  justified  in  accordance  with  the  reasoning  that  a 
product  cannot  exist  apart  from  its  material  cause.  But  if  the 
creation  of  all  this,  starting  from  Prana,  be  only  in  a  secondary 
sense,  then  the  assertion  will  be  falsified.2  And  it  is  in  keeping 
with  this,  that  the  assertion  made  (earlier)  is  concluded  thus: 
“Puru$a  alone  is  all  this — (comprising)  the  karma  and  know¬ 
ledge.  He  who  knows  this  supremely  immortal  Brahman,  (as 
existing  in  the  heart,  destroys  here  the  knot  of  ignorance)” 
(Mu.  II.  i.  10),  and  “This  world  is  nothing  but  Brahman,  the 
highest”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11).  So  also  such  Upani$adic  texts  as,  “By 
the  realization  of  the  Self,  my  dear,  through  hearing,  reflection, 
and  meditation,  all  this  is  known”  (Bj*.  II.  iv.  5),  are  to  be 
understood  as  making  the  same  declaration. 

Opponent:  Why  then  does  a  Vedic  text  speak  of  the  exist¬ 
ence  of  the  pranas  (organs)  before  creation? 

Veddntin :  That  sentence  does  not  speak  of  the  ultimate 
material  cause  (Brahman  as  existing  in  association  with  Prana), 
for  in  the  text  “He  is  without  Prana ,  and  without  mind;  He  is 
pure  and  superior  to  the  (other)  superior  immutable  (i.e. 
Maya)”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  it  is  asserted  that  the  ultimate  material 
cause  is  free  from  all  such  distinctive  features  as  Prana  etc.  But 
it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  assertion  about  the  existence  of 
the  pranas  (organs)  before  creation  is  made  from  the  standpoint 
of  the  (organs  of  the)  subsequent  material  cause  (Hiranyagarbha 

#If  Brahman  be  the  material  cause  in  a  figurative  sense,  all  things  will 
not  be  known  even  when  Brahman  is  known. 


n.  iv.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  525 

derived  from  Brahman)  which  is  again  a  cause  of  its  own 
derivatives.  For  it  is  well  established  on  the  strength  of  the 
Vedas  and  Smrtis  that  the  things  that  have  become  manifested 
(through  names  and  forms)  in  several  stages  are  themselves 
related  by  way  of  being  the  material  causes  and  products  (in  a 
successive  order).  As  the  aphorism  “ gaunyasambhav&t ”  (II.  iii. 
3)  appearing  under  the  topic  of  space  stated  the  position  of 
the  opponent,  it  was  explained  to  mean:  “Any  Vedic  text  about 
origin  is  secondary,  for  a  primary  sense  is  impossible”.  And  the 
answer  was  given  there  by  saying  that  such  an  interpretation 
would  lead  to  an  abandonment  of  the  “general  assertion”  (or 
original  declaration).  But  since  the  present  aphorism  states  the 
conclusion  of  the  Vedantin,  the  explanation  is  made  by  saying, 
“Because  of  the  impossibility  of  (the  text  about  origin  having) 
the  secondary  sense”.  Those,  however,  who  in  conformity  with 
that  earlier  aphorism,  would  interpret  this  one  also  to  mean, 
“Any  Vedic  text  speaking  of  origin  is  used  metaphorically,  for 
a  primary  sense  is  inadmissible”,  would  ignore  (the  consequent 
difficulty,  viz)  the  abandonment  of  the  original  declaration  (of 
all  being  known  from  one). 

11311 

^  Also  because  that  term,  (jay ate,  “is  born”), 

is  used  earlier  in  the  Upani$ad. 

3.  Also  because  that  term ,  (“is  bom”),  is  used  earlier  (in  the 
primary  sense)  in  the  Upanifad  (in  connection  with  Prana).3 

For  this  further  reason  the  Vedic  text  about  the  origin  of  the 
pranas  is  to  be  taken  in  its  primary  sense  just  as  in  the  case  of 
space  etc.,  for  the  very  same  term  jdyate,  signifying  origin, 
that  is  heard  of  earlier  in  connection  with  the  pranas  (organs) 
is  applied  later  to  space  etc.  as  well.  It  was  proved  that 
the  origin  of  space  etc.  is  spoken  of  in  the  primary  sense 

8  “From  Him  originate  (jay ate)  Prana  as  well  as  the  mind,  all  the  senses, 
space,  air,  fire,  water,  and  earth  that  supports  everything”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3), 
where  the  origin  of  Prana  is  spoken  of  in  the  primary  sense  earlier  than 
the  origin  of  space  etc.  in  the  primary  sense. 


526  BRAHMA -SCTTRA-BHA5YA  [H.iv.3 

in  the  text,  “From  Him  originates  Prana ”  etc.  (Mu.  II.  i.  3). 
Because  of  the  use  of  the  same  word  “origin”  (in  connection 
with  space,  etc.)  the  origin  spoken  of  in  the  case  of  the  pranas 
also  should  be  understood  in  the  primary  sense.  For  a  single 
term,  used  only  once  in  the  same  context  in  the  same  sentence 
and  connected  with  many  things,  cannot  be  understood  to  have 
a  primary  sense  in  some  places  and  a  secondary  sense  at  others; 
for  that  would  involve  a  distortion.  So  also  in  the  text,  “He 
created  Prana ,  and  faith  from  Prana ”  (Pr.  VI.  4),  the  term 
“creation”  heard  of  in  connection  with  pram,  becomes  con¬ 
nected  with  faith  and  the  rest  that  too  have  origin.  This  logic 
applies  equally  at  places  where  a  term  denoting  origin  is  met 
with  in  the  latter  parts  of  a  sentence,  but  has  to  be  connected 
with  earlier  words,  as  for  instance,  the  term  “emanate  ( vyuc - 
car  anti )”  used  at  the  end  of  the  passage,  “all  the  beings 
emanate”4  (Bj\  II.  i.  20)  is  connected  with  the  pranas  and  the 
rest  occurring  in  the  earlier  part  of  the  sentence. 

IDfll 

On  account  of  their  precedence  over  speech 

(etc.). 

4.  (Pranas  must  have  originated  front  Brahman)  since  speech 
is  preceded  by  them. 

Although  the  origin  of  the  pranas  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
context,  “That  created  fire”  etc.  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  the  origin  of 
the  three  elements — fire,  water,  and  earth — alone  being  heard 
of,  still  from  the  mention  of  the  fact  that  (the  organ  of)  speech, 
the  vital  force  (Prana),  and  the  mind  emanate  from  fire,  water, 
and  earth  (respectively),  which  have  Brahman  as  their  material 
cause,  it  follows  that  all  the  organs  must  have  originated  from 
Brahman,  for  the  latter  too  are  on  a  par  with  the  former,  (all 
being  equally  pranas — organs).  To  explain  this:  In  this  very  con¬ 
text  (of  the  Chandogya),  speech,  the  vital  force,  and  the  mind 

4 '‘All  the  organs,  all  worlds,  all  gods,  and  all  beings  emanate  from  this 
self.” 


II.iv.5] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


527 


are  mentioned  as  proceeding  (respectively)  out  of  fire,  water, 
and  earth  in  the  text,  “For  the  mind  is  formed  out  of  food 
(earth),  O  amiable  one,  the  vital  force  is  formed  out  of  water, 
and  speech  is  formed  out  of  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  v.  4).  Now  if  their 
birth  from  earth  etc.  be  spoken  of  in  the  primary  sense  in  that 
text,  it  goes  without  saying  that  they  must  have  originated  from 
Brahman.  Even  though  a  secondary  sense  be  assumed,  still  from 
the  fact  that  their  origin  is  mentioned  in  the  course  of  (describ¬ 
ing)  the  process  of  the  manifestation  of  names  and  forms  by 
Brahman,  and  from  the  fact  that  the  start  is  made  with  the  text, 
“That  by  knowing  which  the  unheard  becomes  heard”  (Ch.  VI. 
i.  3)  and  the  conclusion  is  made  with  the  text,  “All  this  has  that 
(Brahman)  as  its  self’  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  and  from  the  fact  that 
this  is  a  well-known  fact  in  the  other  Upani$ads,  it  becomes 
evident  that  when  the  mind  etc.  are  spoken  of  as  having  origi¬ 
nated  from  food  etc.,  the  motive  is  to  elaborate  the  fact  that 
they  are  produced  from  Brahman  Itself.  From  this  also  it 
follows  that  the  pranas  originated  from  Brahman. 

Topic  2:  Number  of  Pranas 

The  Vedic  textual  conflict  about  the  origin  of  the  pranas  has 
been  resolved.  Now  is  being  resolved  the  conflict  about  number. 
While  on  this  topic  of  pranas ,  the  (chief)  Prana  (vital  force) 
will  be  dealt  with  (by  the  aphorist)  later;  now  is  being  deter¬ 
mined  the  number  of  the  other  pranas  (organs). 

The  doubt  (about  the  number)  arises  here  owing  to  a  conflict 
among  the  Vedic  texts.  At  one  place  the  pranas  are  declared  to 
be  seven,  as  in,  “From  Him  emerge  the  seven  pranas”  (Mu.  II. 
i.  8).  At  another  place  again  eight  pranas  characterized  as 
grahas  (i.e.  perceivers  or  sense-organs),  are  declared,  as  in, 
“There  are  eight  grahas  and  eight  atigrahas  (i.e.  super-gra&w, 
i.e.  sense-objects  determining  the  nature  of  the  perceptions)” — 
(Bj\  III.  ii.  1).  At  some  place  the  number  is  nine:  “The  pranas  in 
the  head  are  seven  indeed,  and  two  are  below”  (Tai.  S.  V.  i. 
7.1).  In  some  place  the  number  is  ten:  “Nine  indeed  are  the 
organs  in  a  man,  and  the  tenth  is  the  navel”  (Tai.  S.  V.  iii.  2.3). 
In  another  place  it  is  eleven:  “The  ten  organs  in  the  human  body 
with  the  mind  as  the  eleventh”  (B{\  III.  ix.  4).  In  some  place  it 


528  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.iv.5 

is  twelve,  for  instance  in  the  text  (beginning  with):  “As  the 
skin  is  the  one  goal  of  all  kinds  of  touch”  etc.  (By.  II.  iv.  11); 
somewhere  it  is  thirteen,  as  in  the  text  (beginning  with):  “The 
organ  of  sight  and  the  object  of  vision”  etc.  (Pr.  IV.  8).  Thus 
are  the  Vedic  texts  at  variance  as  regards  the  number  of  the 
pranas.  What  then  is  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at? 

nv.li 

seven  (in  number)  because  of  being  so  understood 
rf  and  because  of  being  specified. 

S.  The  pranas  are  seven  in  number  because  of  being  so  known 
and  because  of  such  a  specification . 

Opponent :  The  pranas  are  surely  seven  in  number. 

Why? 

“Because  of  being  so  known”,  because  the  organs  are  known 
to  be  so  many  from  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “From  Him  emerge 
the  seven  pranas ”  (Mu.  II.  i.  8).  Moreover,  they  are  specified  as 
such  in,  “The  prdrias  in  the  head  are  seven  indeed”  (Tai.  S.  V.  i. 
7.1). 

Objection :  We  come  across  a  repetition  of  the  word  “seven” 
in  the  text:  “The  pranas  have  been  deposited  (in  the  cavity  of 
the  heart)  by  seven  and  seven”  (Mu.  II.  i.  8).  And  that  repeti¬ 
tion  leads  us  to  understand  that  the  prarias  are  more  than  seven. 

Opponent :  That  is  no  defect;  for  the  repetition  is  made  from 
the  point  of  view  of  the  different  persons,  meaning  thereby  that 
the  pranas  are  seven  in  each  person,  but  not  that  each  group 
of  seven  pranas  differs  from  other  groups  of  seven  pranas 
intrinsically. 

Objection :  Have  not  the  numbers  eight,  etc.  also  been  cited 
in  regard  to  the  pranas ?  So  how  can  they  be  seven  only? 

Opponent :  True,  they  have  been  cited;  but  since  there  is 
a  conflict,  only  one  of  the  numbers  has  to  be  accepted.  But  as 
it  is  reasonable  to  assume  the  smallest  number,  (according  to  the 
law  of  parsimony),  we  stick  to  the  number  seven.  The  other 
figures  that  are  met  with  in  the  texts,  are  used  from  the  point  of 
view  of  the  difference  of  functions. 


II.  iv.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  529 

Vedantin  :  To  this  the  reply  is  being  given: 

ii^ii 

g  But  ^g’-srr^T:  hands  etc.  (are  there);  it  being  estab¬ 
lished  (thus)  a^f:  therefore  ;j  not  so. 

6 .  But  the  hands  etc .  are  *£ere;  since  (an  excess  is)  established 
thus y  therefore  it  is  not  so. 

But  hands  and  other  pranas  are  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ads  in 
addition  to  the  seven  pranas  in  such  texts  as,  “The  hands  indeed 
are  the  grahas ;  they  are  controlled  by  the  atigraha ,  work,  for 
one  does  work  with  the  hands”  (Bj*.  III.  ii.  8).  “It  being  estab¬ 
lished”  that  there  is  an  excess  over  seven,  it  is  even  possible  to 
justify  the  number  seven  by  considering  it  to  be  included  in 
the  greater  number.  When  there  is  a  dispute  about  a  smaller  and 
a  greater  number,  the  greater  number  should  be  accepted, 
for  the  smaller  one  can  be  accommodated  within  the  greater; 
but  not  so  can  the  greater  be  accommodated  within  the  smaller. 
Hence  it  is  not  to  be  thought  that  the  pranas  must  be  seven  in 
number  in  keeping  with  the  logic  of  preferring  the  less  (in 
conformity  with  the  law  of  parsimony).  Rather  those  pranas 
should  be  eleven  only,  in  accordance  with  the  (greater)  number 
occurring  later.  In  support  of  this,  the  text  was  quoted:  “The 
ten  organs  in  the  human  body  with  the  atmd,  as  the  eleventh” 
(Bf.  III.  ix.  4).  By  the  word  atmd ,  we  are  to  understand  the 
internal  organ  (mind),  for  the  context  is  of  the  organs  (and 
not  of  the  Self  which  is  the  usual  meaning  of  dtma ). 

Opponent :  Were  not  numbers  greater  than  eleven,  viz  twelve 
and  thirteen  cited  by  us? 

Vedantin :  Truly  they  were  cited;  but  there  are  no  such 
objects  (or  functions)  over  and  above  eleven,  for  the  sake  of 
which  one  would  have  to  posit  more  organs.  The  five  sense- 
objects  are  sound,  touch,  colour,  taste,  and  smell;  and  there 
are  five  sense-organs  (ear,  skin,  eye,  tongue,  and  nose)  for  their 
perception.  The  five  activities  are  speaking,  grasping,  walking, 
ejecting,  and  enjoying,  for  which  are  the  five  motor-organs. 
And  the  mind  which  has  to  deal  with  all  the  objects  and  which 
34 


530  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.iv.6 

operates  over  all  the  three  periods  of  time  is  but  one  having 
various  functions.  According  to  the  difference  of  these  func¬ 
tions,  that  same  internal  organ  is  sometimes  referred  to  by 
various  names,  viz  mind,  intellect,  mind-stuff  (memory),  and 
egoism,  as  though  these  are  quite  different.  Thus  it  is  that  after 
enumerating  the  different  functions  starting  with  desire,  the 
Upani$ad  says:  “(Desire,  resolve,  doubt,  faith,  want  of  faith, 
steadiness,  unsteadiness,  shame,  intelligence,  and  fear) — all  these 
are  but  the  mind”  (B I.  v.  3).  Moreover,  one  who  would 
consider  the  seven  organs  (two  eyes,  two  ears,  two  nostrils, 
and  tongue)  in  the  head  to  be  the  only  organs,  would  really 
accept  four  organs  (of  seeing,  hearing,  smelling,  and  talking); 
for  though  they  are  really  four,  they  become  manifested  in 
different  places  and  are  then  counted  as  seven,  viz  two  ears, 
two  eyes,  two  nostrils,  and  one  tongue.  It  cannot  be  asserted 

that  the  other  organs  are  but  the  different  functions  of  these 

four,  for  the  functions  of  the  (motor-organs  like)  hands  etc. 
belong  altogether  to  a  different  class.  Similarly  in  the  text, 
“Nine  indeed  are  the  pranas  in  a  man,  the  tenth  is  the  navel” 
(Tai.  S.  VII.  v.  1.2),  the  pranas  are  numbered  as  ten  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  orifices  in  the  body,  but  not  from  the 

point  of  view  of  the  difference  in  the  nature  of  the  organs, 

which  fact  becomes  clear  from  the  statement,  “The  navel  is 
the  tenth.”  For  no  such  organ  as  the  navel  is  recognized  any¬ 
where.  But  for  the  chief  vital  force,  the  navel,  too,  is  a  special 
place  of  residence,  and  hence  it  is  said  that  the  navel  is  the 
tenth.  Some  organs  are  counted  somewhere  for  the  sake  of 
meditation  (Tai.  S.  V.  i.  7.1),  whereas  elsewhere  they  are 
counted  by  way  of  illustrating  (some  point  in  view)  (as  in 
Br.  III.  ii.  1).  Thus  since  the  counting  of  the  organs  follows 
diverse  patterns,  one  has  to  consider  what  point  of  view  is 
involved  in  a  particular  statement.  The  final  conclusion  that 
stands  established,  however,  is  that  the  mention  of  the  pranas 
as  eleven  is  authoritative,  since  that  conforms  to  the  objects  (or 
functions)  of  the  organs. 

Here  is  an  alternative  way  of  explaining  .the  two  aphorisms: 

Opponent :  The  pranas  (organs)  must  be  seven  in  number, 
since  the  Upani$ad  mentions  the  departure  of  seven  only  (at  the 


II.  iv.6]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  531 

time  of  death)  in  the  text,  “When  it  (the  soul)  departs,  the 
vital  force  follows;  when  the  vital  force  departs  all  the  (sense-) 
organs  follow”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  2). 

Objection :  Is  not  the  word  “all”  also  mentioned  there?  Why 
is  it  asserted  that  the  seven  organs  alone  depart? 

Opponent :  The  answer  is  given  in,  “because  there  is  such 
a  specification”.  The  relevant  seven  organs  alone,  counting  from 
the  eyes  to  the  skin,  are  “specified”,  that  is  to  say,  dealt  with 
here  one  by  one  by  making  the  start  with,  “[When  this  (soul) 
becomes  weak  and  senseless,  as  it  were,  the  organs  come  to  it] 
. . .  When  the  presiding  deity  of  the  eye  turns  back  from  all 
sides,  the  man  fails  to  notice  colour.  The  eye  becomes  united 
(with  the  subtle  body);  then  people  say,  ‘He  does  not  see’” 
(Bj\  IV.  iv.  1-2).  Besides,  the  word  “all”  refers  to  all  that  is 
relevant  (to  the  context).  Thus  when  it  is  said,  “All  the 
Brahmaoas  have  to  be  fed”,  the  invited  Brahmagas,  who  form 
the  subject  of  the  speech,  are  alone  meant  by  the  word  “all”  and 
not  the  others  (who  are  uninvited).  Similarly  in  the  present 
context,  the  seven  pranas  which  are  under  discussion  (viz  the 
organs  of  vision,  smell,  speech,  enjoyment,  hearing,  thinking, 
touch)  are  referred  to  by  the  word  “all”,  but  not  the  others. 

Objection :  Is  not  the  intellect  also  counted  (in  Bf.  IV.  iv.  2) 
as  the  eighth?  So  how  can  it  be  said  that  the  seven  alone  are 
enumerated? 

Opponent :  That  is  no  defect;  for  although  the  mind  and  the 
intellect  differ  in  their  functions  (of  thinking  and  knowing), 
they  have  no  substantial  difference;  and  hence  the  number  seven 
is  justifiable.  Therefore  the  pranas  are  seven  only. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  “But  there  are 
in  evidence  other  organs  like  the  hands  etc.  over  and  above  the 
seven”,  as  mentioned  in  such  texts  as,  “The  two  hands  are  the 
graha”  etc.  (Bj\  III.  ii.  8).  This  state  of  being  a  graha  conveys 
the  sense  of  bondage,  implying  that  the  embodied  soul  becomes 
bound  down  by  this  bondage  called  the  graha  (lit.  one  that 
grasps).  That  embodied  soul  is  not  bound  down  to  a  single 
body,  for  bondage  exists  equally  in  other  bodies  as  well.  So  by 
implication  this  comes  to  mean  that  this  bondage,  called  graha , 
moves  over  to  other  bodies  as  well.  And  in  support  of  this  is 


532  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iv.  6 

the  Smjti  text:  “He  (the  soul)  becomes  associated  with  the 
assemblage  of  eight,5  counting  from  Prana ,  which  (eight) 
become  its  indicatory  marks.  One  becomes  bound  when  one  is 
under  their  bondage,  and  free  when  liberated  from  them.”  This 
text  shows  that  till  liberation,  the  soul  does  not  become  disso¬ 
ciated  from  this  bondage,  called  graha .  And  in  the  PraSna 
Upani$ad  of  the  Atharva  Veda,  where  the  organs  and  their 
objects  are  enumerated  in  the  passage  opening  with,  “the  organ 
of  sight,  and  the  object  of  vision”  (IV.  8),  the  organs  (of 
action)  like  hands  etc.  are  also  enumerated  along  with  their 
objects  in  a  similar  way  in,  “the  hands  and  the  objects  grasped, 
sex  and  enjoyment,  the  organ  of  excretion  and  the  excreta,  the 
feet  and  the  space  trodden”  (ibid.).  Similarly,  the  text,  “These 
are  the  ten  organs  in  the  human  body,  with  the  mind  as  the 
eleventh.  When  they  depart  from  this  mortal  body,  they  make 
(one’s  relations)  weep”  (Bj\  III.  ix.  4),  shows  that  the  eleven 
organs  leave  the  body  (after  death).  And  the  word  “all”, 
being  connected  with  the  word  pr&i}asy  indicates  all  the 
pr&xMS,  and  hence  it  cannot  be  confined  to  the  seven  alone 
on  the  strength  of  the  immediate  topic;  for  a  direct  Vedic 
text  is  of  higher  authority  than  a  topic.  Even  in  the  exam¬ 
ple,  “All  the  Brahmaoas  are  to  be  fed”,  we  should  logically 
understand  all  the  Brahmaoas  on  the  earth,  for  that  is  the 
meaning  of  the  word  “all”.  But  since  the  feeding  of  all  is  not 
possible,  we  understand  by  a  figure  of  speech  that  the  “all” 
implies  all  the  invited  Brahmaoas.  But  in  the  case  under  discus¬ 
sion  there  is  no  valid  ground  for  restricting  the  meaning  of 
“all”.  Therefore  all  the  pranas  are  to  be  understood  here  by 
the  word  “all”,  though  the  seven  are  presented  by  way  of  illus¬ 
tration.  Thus  this  is  beyond  criticism.  Hence,  the  conclusion 
arrived  at  is  that  the  pranas  are  eleven  in  number  as  gathered 
from  the  Vedic  texts  and  in  accordance  with  their  function. 


#  (i)  The  five  vital  forces,  (ii)  the  five  subtle  elements,  (iii)  the  five 
organs  of  actions,  (iv)  the  five  organs  of  perception,  (v)  the  mind  in  its 
four  aspects,  (vi)  ignorance,  (vii)  desire,  and  (viii)  action. 


II.  iv.  8]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  533 

Topic  3:  Atomic  Pranas 

W«f  livsll 

7.  And  the  organs  are  atomic  (i.e.  subtle  and  limited  in  size). 

Now  is  being  added  another  characteristic  of  the  organs  them¬ 
selves.  These  organs,  that  are  being  considered,  are  also  to  be 
known  as  atomic.  The  atomicity  of  the  organs  consists  in  their 
being  fine  (beyond  sight  and  touch)  and  limited  (of  a  medium 
size);  but  they  are  not  like  the  ultimate  atoms,  for  that  would 
make  their  activities  over  the  entire  body  impossible.  These 
organs  are  subtle;  for  if  they  were  gross,  they  would  have  been 
perceived  by  people  near  a  dying  man,  when  they  come  out  of 
the  body  like  a  snake  out  of  its  hole.  And  these  organs  are 
limited  in  size;  for  if  they  be  all-pervasive,  it  will  set  at  naught 
the  Vedic  texts  speaking  of  their  departure  from  and  coming 
back  (to  the  body);  and  in  that  case,  it  will  not  be  established 
that  “the  soul  comes  to  have  such  appellations  because  of  the 
dominance  of  the  modes  of  the  intellect”6  (B.  S.  II.  iii.  29). 

Opponent :  Even  though  the  organs  be  all-pervasive,  they  can 
function  only  in  the  body. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  every 
function  is  a  karana  (i.e.  an  organ  for  the  soul);  for  according 
to  us,  whatever  (in  the  body)  performs  a  function  is  itself  a 
karana ,  call  it  a  function  or  something  else  (a  function  or  a 
functionary).7  That  being  the  case,  the  contention  would  centre 
round  a  mere  term.  Hence  it  would  be  useless  to  fancy  that 
the  organs  are  all-pervasive.  Thus  we  assert  that  these  organs 
are  subtle  and  limited  in  size. 

Topic  4 :  Chief  Prana  :  Its  Creation 

IRI 

8.  So  also  the  foremost  (Prana  is  a  product  of  Brahman). 

0  If  the  organs  be  all-pervasive,  then  it  cannot  be  proved  that  the  soul 
comes  to  be  considered  as  atomic  owing  to  its  association  with  the  organs. 

7  The  organs  are  the  karanas ,  which  term  is  defined  as  a  cause  serving 
best  to  produce  the  effect.  For  instance  the  eye  is  a  karapa  of  vision, 
and  hands  of  grasping. 


534  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iv.  8 

The  conclusion  (that  the  other  pranas  are  the  products  of 
Brahman)  is  being  extended  to  the  chief  Prana  to  imply  that 
it  too  is  a  product  of  Brahman  like  the  other  pranas.  And  this 
is  thus:  It  has  been  said  in  a  general  way  that  all  the  pranas  are 
the  products  of  Brahman,  for  in  the  Upani$adic  text,  “From 
Him  originates  the  vital  force  (Prana)  as  well  as  the  mind  and 
all  the  senses”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3),  we  hear  of  the  origin  of  Prana 
separately  from  the  origin  of  the  mind  associated  with  the 
organs;  and  we  also  have  this  from  such  texts  as,  “He  created 
Prana ”  (Pr.  VI.  4). 

Opponent :  What  again  is  the  need  for  this  extended  applica¬ 
tion? 

Vedantin :  It  is  meant  for  removing  another  doubt.  For  in 
the  Nasadiya  Sukta  (hymn  starting  with  linasad  dsit”)  which 
has  Brahman  as  its  subject-matter,  there  is  a  descriptive  verse 
(of  dissolution):  “Then  there  was  neither  death,  nor  even 
nectar;  there  was  neither  (moon)  the  symbol  of  night,  nor 
(sun)  the  symbol  of  day.  Only  the  one  Brahman  breathed  (or 
vibrated,  i.e.  existed)  together  with  the  Maya  held  in  Itself, 
but  without  any  air.  Apart  from  it,  nothing  existed  either  as 
different  or  higher”.  (R  V.  VIII.  vii.  17).  Since  in  the  word 
“Unit  (lit.  vibrated  or  breathed)”,  the  activity  of  prana  is  men¬ 
tioned,  (it  may  be  argued  that)  the  text  indicates  as  though 
Prana  existed  before  creation.  From  this  somebody  may  arrive 
at  the  conclusion  that  Prana  is  birthless.  That  misconception  is 
being  removed  with  the  help  of  the  extended  application  (of  the 
previous  conclusion).  Even  the  word  dnit  does  not  indicate  the 
existence  of  Prana  before  creation,  for  it  is  modified  by  the 
word  avdtam  (without  air).  Moreover,  in  the  text,  “He  is 
without  Prana  and  without  mind;  He  is  pure”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  it 
is  shown  that  the  ultimate  material  cause  is  free  from  all  such 
attributes  as  the  Prana.  Accordingly,  the  word  amt  (in  the  sense 
of  dsit)  is  here  used  only  to  show  the  existence  of  the  cause 
(Brahman).8 

The  word  sretfha  (foremost)  denotes  the  chief  vital  force, 

•According  to  the  opponent,  Unit  means  “breathed  or  vibrated”;  but 
the  Vedantin  interprets  it  as  uasit — existed”. 


II. iv.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  535 

for  this  is  pointed  out  by  the  Upani$adic  text,  “ Prana  is  indeed 
the  first  born  and  the  foremost”  (Ch.  V.  i.  1).  Prana  is  the 
eldest  because  it  starts  functioning  from  the  very  act  of  deposit¬ 
ing  the  seed  (in  the  womb).  Were  Prana  inactive  at  the  time, 
the  seed  deposited  in  the  uterus  would  either  suppurate  or  fail 
to  lead  to  conception.  But  none  of  the  other  organs — ear  and 
the  rest — is  the  eldest;  since  it  can  function  only  after  its  aper¬ 
ture,  such  as  the  ear-hole,  is  developed.  And  Prana  is  the  fore¬ 
most,  because  of  its  superior  qualities;  for  the  Upani$ad  declares: 
“We  cannot  live  without  you”  (said  the  other  organs),  (Bf. 
VI.  i.  13). 


Topic  5  :  Nature  of  Prana 

iis.il 

Not  crpj-faaj’  air  and  function  on  account  °f 

being  taught  separately. 

9.  Prana  is  neither  air  nor  a  junction,  because  it  is  taught 
separately. 

Now  is  being  considered  the  nature  of  this  chief  Prana. 
When  on  this  subject,  the  apparent  view  is  that  prana  is  air 
according  to  the  Upani$ad:  “That  which  is  Prana  is  air,  and  that 
air  is  of  five  kinds:  outgoing  breath,  incoming  breath,  that 
which  is  spread  over  the  whole  body,  that  which  moves  upward, 
and  that  which  digests.”  Or  the  conclusion  may  be  that  Praria 
is  the  combined  activity  of  all  the  organs,  as  it  is  believed  by 
another  school  of  thought  (Sariikhyas).  For  the  followers  of 
that  school  speak  thus:  “The  five  kinds  of  vayu  (air),  counting 
from  Prana ,  are  merely  the  combined  activities  of  the  organs.” 

Veddntin  :  With  regard  to  this  the  answer  is:  uPrdna  is  nei¬ 
ther  air  nor  any  function  (of  the  organs).” 

Why? 

“Because  it  is  taught  separately.”  For  example.  Prana  is  spoken 
of  separately  from  air  in,  “ Prana  indeed  is  a  quadrant  of  Brah¬ 
man;  it  shines  and  scatters  heat9  with  air  as  its  light”  (Ch.  III. 


•Becomes  manifest  and  active  in  its  own  sphere. 


536  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iv.  9 

xviii.  4).  Had  Prdiia  been  the  same  as  air,  it  would  not  have 
been  mentioned  separately  from  air.  Similarly  Prana  is  spoken  of 
separately  from  the  activities  of  the  organs,  for  after  enumerat¬ 
ing  the  organs  of  speech  and  the  rest  one  by  one,  instruction  is 
given  about  Prana  separately  at  various  places.  Since  one  who 
functions  and  the  function  itself  are  non-different,  therefore 
Prana  would  not  have  been  spoken  of  separately  if  it  were  a 
mere  function  of  the  organs.  Besides,  we  should  take  into  consid¬ 
eration  the  instructions  about  Prana  separately  from  air  and 
the  functions  as  contained  in  such  texts  as:  “From  Him  origi¬ 
nates  Prdya  as  well  as  the  mind  and  all  the  organs,  space,  and 
air”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3).  Moreover,  it  is  not  a  possibility  that  all  the 
organs  should  have  a  single  combined  function,  for  each  one 
has  its  individual  function,  and  a  collection  of  things  cannot 
have  any  such  independent  activity. 

Opponent :  This  can  be  possible  on  the  analogy  of  moving  a 
cage.  Just  as  eleven  birds  living  in  the  same  cage  can  have  their 
well-determined  individual  activities,  and  yet  in  their  combina¬ 
tion  may  shake  the  cage,  similarly,  though  the  eleven  organs 
contained  in  the  same  body  have  their  well-defined  individual 
functions,  yet  in  their  combination  they  perform  a  function 
which  is  called  Prdya. 

Veddntin :  The  answer  is,  no.  In  the  illustration,  it  is  quite 
possible  for  the  birds  to  shake  the  cage  in  their  combination, 
endowed  as  they  are  with  some  individual  subsidiary  activities 
conducive  to  the  shaking  of  the  cage;  for  this  is  a  matter  of 
experience.  But  in  the  case  under  discussion,  it  is  not  reasonable 
to  hold  that  the  organs,  possessed  of  the  subsidiary  (individual) 
functions  of  hearing  etc.,  should  perform  in  their  combination 
the  function  of  Prana  (viz  living),  because  there  is  no  proof  in 
support  of  this,  and  because  the  function  of  living  is  quite 
different  in  nature  from  those  of  hearing  etc.10  Moreover,  the 
declaration  of  the  superiority  etc.  of  Prana ,  and  the  taking  up  of 
positions  subordinate  to  it  by  speech  etc.,  do  not  fit  in  with  a 
Prana  conceived  of  as  a  mere  function  of  the  organs.  Therefore 

“There  is  nothing  to  prove  that  the  ears  etc.  act  in  a  way  to  produce 
life.  Also  there  is  no  proof  that  all  of  them  act  simultaneously. 


II.  iv.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  537 

(the  chief)  Prdipa  is  different  both  from  air  and  the  functions 
(of  the  organs). 

Opponent:  How  then  can  there  be  such  a  text  as:  “That 
which  is  Prrnia  is  air”  (Bf.  III.  i.  5)? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is:  It  is  the  selfsame  air  itself  that,  after 
entering  the  body  and  assuming  five  aspects,  and  existing  there 
with  some  specialized  features  (not  present  in  common  air),  is 
called  by  the  word  Prana,  but  it  is  neither  a  different  principle 
nor  is  it  mere  air.  Hence  there  is  no  conflict  between  the  texts 
showing  identity  and  difference. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  then  that  just  like  the  soul,  (the 
chief)  Prana  also  becomes  independent  in  this  body  by  virtue 
of  its  own  predominance  and  the  acceptance  of  secondary  posi¬ 
tions  by  the  organs  of  speech  and  the  rest.  It  is  in  accordance 
with  this  that  many  kinds  of  glory  of  Prdria  are  mentioned  by 
the  Vedic  texts,  such  for  instance  as:  “When  the  organs  go  to 
sleep,  PrdQa  alone  keeps  awake”;  “Prdna  alone  is  not  overpowered 
by  death”  (Bj\  I.  v.  21);  “Prctya  is  the  place  of  merger”  (Ch.  IV. 
iii.  3),  for  it  withdraws  into  itself  the  organs  of  speech  etc.; 
“Praya  protects  the  other  organs  like  a  mother  her  sons”  (Pr. 
II.  13).  Hence  there  arises  the  possibility  of  Pr&ya  too  having 
independence  like  the  soul. 

Vedantin :  That  position  is  being  refuted. 


But  (not  independent)  just  like  the  organs  of 

vision  etc.  :  on  account  of  having  been  taught 

along  with  them  and  other  reasons. 

10.  But  Prana  is  not  independent  just  like  the  organs  of  vision 
etc.,  because  instruction  is  imparted  along  with  them  and  because 
of  other  reasons . 

The  word  “but”  rules  out  the  view  that  (the  chief)  Prana  is 
independent  like  the  soul.  As  the  eye  etc.  are  not  independent, 
but  are  subservient  to  the  soul  for  making  possible  its  agentship 
and  experience,  even  as  the  king’s  subjects  are  to  the  king,  so 
also  the  chief  Prana  is  subservient  to  the  soul,  managing  every- 


538  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iv.  10 

thing  for  it  like  the  minister  of  a  king;  but  it  is  not  independent. 

Opponent :  Why? 

Vedantin :  “Because  instruction  is  imparted  (in  the  scrip¬ 
tures)  along  with  them,  and  because  of  other  reasons.”  For  in 
such  places  as  the  story  of  Prana ,  it  is  spoken  of  along  with 
them,  i.e.  the  organs  of  vision  etc.  And  it  is  reasonable  to  in¬ 
struct  about  things  of  the  same  nature  together,  as  in  the  case 
of  the  hymns  Bfhat ,  Rathantara ,  etc.  (which  are  sung  together 
in  a  sacrifice).  By  the  term  “other  reasons”  are  shown  such 
additional  grounds  for  eliminating  Prana's  independence,  as  its 
being  a  composite  thing,  unconscious,  and  so  on. 

Opponent :  It  may  be  said  that  if  Prana  be  assumed  to  be  an 
organ  of  the  soul  just  like  the  organs  of  vision  etc.,  then  it 
should  have  its  own  distinct  object  like  (the  eye  etc.  having) 
colour  etc.  For  the  eye  etc.  become  the  organs  of  the  soul, 
owing  to  such  individual  functions  as  the  cognition  of  colour 
and  so  on.  Moreover,  the  functions  are  counted  to  be  eleven 
only,  viz  perception  of  colour  and  so  on,  in  conformity  with 
which  the  organs  are  also  enumerated  as  eleven;  but  no  such 
twelfth  group  of  functions  is  met  with  for  accommodating 
which  this  twelfth  organ  has  to  be  assumed. 

Vedantin :  Hence  comes  the  answer: 

*  imm  HUM 

^  And  arawuifrsfl^  since  it  is  not  a  sense-organ,  sfta:  no 
fault  (arises);  f|  for  cHTT  so  (the  Upani$ad)  shows. 

11.  No  fault  accrues ,  because  Prana  is  not  a  sense-organ .  For 
thus  it  is  shown  in  the  Upanisads . 

The  defect  of  a  fresh  object  being  needed  does  not  arise,  for 
Prana  is  not  an  organ,  inasmuch  as  Prana ,  unlike  the  eye  etc., 
is  not  recognized  to  be  a  sense-organ  from  the  point  of  view  of 
its  determining  (through  cognition)  some  object  of  perception. 
But  this  is  not,  however,  tantamount  to  its  having  no  function. 

How? 

For  the  (Chandogya)  Upani$ad  shows  in  such  contexts  as  the 
story  of  Prana  etc.  that  the  (chief)  Prana  has  a  distinct  function, 


II.  iv.  12] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


539 


which  is  not  possible  for  the  other  pranas  (organs).  The  start 
is  made  with,  “Once  upon  a  time  the  organs  (of  perception  and 
action)  began  to  dispute  about  their  individual  supremacy”;  then 
the  statement  (of  Prajapati)  is  made,  “That  one  among  you  is 
the  greatest,  on  whose  departure,  the  body  seems  to  become  the 
most  impure”  (Ch.  V.  i.  6-7),  and  then  it  is  shown  that  after 
the  departure  of  the  organ  of  speech  etc.  individually,  life  con¬ 
tinues  as  before,  though  without  the  function  of  the  particular 
organ.  Then  the  Upani$ad  shows  that  when  the  (chief)  Prana 
attempts  to  depart,  the  organs,  of  speech  etc.  become  weakened, 
and  there  arises  the  possibility  of  the  death  of  the  body.  While 
showing  all  this,  the  Upani$ad  demonstrates  that  the  continuance 
of  the  body  and  organs  is  dependent  on  Prana .  This  same  fact 
is  stated  in  the  Upani$adic  text,  “To  them  the  (chief)  Prana  said, 
‘Do  not  be  deluded;  it  is  I  who  hold  this  body  together  by 
dividing  myself  in  five  ways  and  providing  support  for  it.’  ” 
(ibid.).  And  in  the  text,  “(The  radiant  infinite  being)  ...  pre¬ 
serves  this  unclean  nest  (of  a  body)  with  the  help  of  Prana 
(vital  force),  (and  roams  out  of  the  nest)”,  the  Bfhadaraijyaka 
Upanisad  (IV.  iii.  12)  shows  that  when  the  organs  sleep,  the 
preservation  of  the  body  is  effected  by  Prana .  It  also  shows  that 
the  nourishment  of  the  body  and  organs  is  accomplished  through 
Prana ,  in  such  texts  as,  “From  whatever  member  the  vital  force 
departs,  right  there  it  withers”  (Br.  I.  iii.  19),  “Whatever  the 
individual  eats  or  drinks  through  Prana ,  thereby  he  nourishes 
the  other  organs”  (echo  of  Br.  I.  iii.  18).  The  departure  of  the 
soul  from  the  body  and  its  continuance  there  are  shown  to  be 
owing  to  Prana  in  the  texts,  “(He  deliberated),  ‘As  a  result 
of  whose  departure  shall  I  rise  up?  And  as  a  result  of  whose 
continuance  shall  I  remain  established?’  He  created  Prana ”  (Pr. 
VI.  3-4). 

It  is  taught  (that  Prana  is)  possessed  of 

five  modes  like  the  mind. 

12.  It  is  taught  that  Prava  has  five  states  like  the  mind . 


540  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iv.  12 

Praya  has  its  own  distinct  functions  for  this  further  reason 
that  Praya  is  spoken  of  in  the  Upani?ads  as  possessed  of  five 
modes  (or  states  of  existence):  “Prana,  apana ,  vyana,  uddna, 
and  samdna ”  (Br.  I.  v.  3).  And  this  distinction  of  states  is 
derived  from  the  different  kinds  of  activity.  Prana  is  that  which 
moves  forward  and  performs  the  function  of  exhaling  etc. 
Apana  is  that  which  goes  backward  and  performs  the  function 
of  inhaling  etc.  Vyana  exists  in  between  these  two  and  performs 
works  requiring  strength.  Uddna  moves  upward  and  is  the  cause 
of  such  acts  as  departure  from  the  body.  Samdna  is  that  which 
carries  the  essence  of  food  equally  ( samdna )  to  all  the  limbs. 
Thus  “Prdya  has  five  states  (modes)  like  the  mind”.  Just  as 
the  mind  has  five  modes,  so  has  Praya.  The  five  modes  of  the 
mind  that  are  caused  by  the  (five)  organs,  ear  etc.,  in  relation 
to  the  (five)  objects,  sound  etc.,  are  well  known.  But  desire, 
resolve,  etc.,  enumerated  in  the  Upani$ad  (Bf.  I.  v.  3),  are  not 
to  be  accepted  (here),  for  they  exceed  the  number  five. 

Opponent :  Even  from  this  viewpoint  there  are  other  mental 
states  comprehending  the  past,  future,  etc.,  which  are  inde¬ 
pendent  of  the  ear  etc.,  and  so  here  is  an  excess  over  the  number 
five  just  the  same. 

Veddntin :  In  that  case,  in  accordance  with  the  dictum, 
“Unless  an  opponent’s  view  is  forbidden,  it  can  be  accepted  as 
one’s  own”,  the  five  mental  states  well-known  in  the  books  on 
Yoga,  can  be  accepted,  which  are,  “Right  knowledge,  error, 
false  knowledge,  sleep,  memory”  (Patanjali,  I.  i.  6).  Or  it  may 
be  understood  in  this  way,  that,  Prana  is  compared  with  the 
mind  in  point  of  the  plurality  of  the  states  only  (but  not  their 
number).  And  the  aphorism  is  to  be  construed  to  mean  that 
since  Prana  has  five  states,  it  is  also  an  instrument  of  the  soul 
just  like  the  mind. 


Topic  6:  Prana  is  Atomic 

apjsr  llftll 

13.  And  the  chief  Prdya  is  atomic  (i.e.  subtle  and  limited  in 
size). 


II.  iv.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  541 

And  like  the  other  pranas  (organs)  the  chief  Pram  is  also 
subtle  (invisible)  and  limited  in  size.  The  atomicity  is  to  be 
understood,  in  this  connection  as  well,  to  mean  subtleness  and 
limitation  in  size  and  not  any  similarity  to  the  ultimate  atoms, 
for  through  its  five  states  it  pervades  the  whole  body.  Prana  is 
subtle  since  people  near  by  do  not  see  it  at  the  time  of  its  leaving 
the  body;  and  it  is  limited  in  size  in  accordance  with  the  Upa- 
ni$adic  texts  speaking  of  its  departure  from  and  coming  back 
to  the  body. 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  all-pervasiveness  also  of  Praria  men¬ 
tioned  by  the  scriptures  in  such  texts  as  the  following:  “It  is 
equal  to  a  white  ant,  equal  to  a  mosquito,  equal  to  an  elephant, 
equal  to  these  three  worlds,  equal  to  this  universe”  (Bj\  I.  iii. 
22)? 

Vedantin:  The  reply  to  this  is:  This  all-pervasiveness  is 
declared  not  from  the  point  of  view  of  any  individual  body, 
but  from  that  of  the  universal  and  individual  aspects  of  the  same 
divine  Pram  residing  in  Hiraflyagarbha.  Moreover,  the  state¬ 
ment,  “equal  to  the  white  ant”  etc.,  which  speaks  of  equality 
(with  different  creatures),  only  points  out  the  fact  that  Prana, 
as  it  exists  in  such  individual  creatures,  is  limited  in  dimension. 
Hence  there  is  no  defect. 

Topic  7:  Presiding  Deities 

q  But  t*iere  ls  (the  fact  °0  presiding 

over  by  Fire  and  others,  ^J-3n,*T?RT?[  for  so  it  is  taught  in  the 
scriptures. 

14.  But  there  is  the  (fact  of)  presiding  over  by  (the  deities) 
Fire  and  others ,  for  so  it  is  taught  in  the  scriptures. 

Now  it  is  being  considered  whether  the  prapas  under  discus¬ 
sion  are  capable  of  engaging  in  their  respective  works  by  virtue 
of  their  own  powers,  or  they  do  so  under  the  guidance  of 
deities. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  conclusion  drawn  is  that  the 


544  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iv.  15 

of  co-ordinated  recognition  etc.11  it  is  realized  that  the  embodied 
soul  which  experiences  in  this  body  is  but  one. 

cfFT  fac^cl  l*t  ll^ll 

^  And  on  account  of  the  constancy  of  that  one 

(i.e.  the  soul). 

16.  And  on  account  of  that  souVs  constant  relation  ('with  the 
body). 

And  the  embodied  soul,  as  the  experiencer,12  has  a  constant 
relation  with  the  body;  for  it  has  the  possibility  of  being  affected 
by  virtue  and  vice  and  the  experiences  of  happiness  and  sorrow, 
but  not  so  the  deities.  For  they  are  seated  in  their  exalted  divine 
spheres,  and  cannot  therefore  reasonably  become  the  experi- 
encers  in  this  ignoble  body.  To  this  effect  occurs  the  text, 
“(Howsoever  these  beings  may  grieve,  that  grief  of  theirs  remains 
connected  with  them).  But  only  merit  goes  to  Him  (Hiragya- 
garbha).  No  demerit  ever  goes  to  the  gods”  (Bf.  I.  v.  20). 
Besides,  the  connection  of  the  organs  is  ever  with  the  embodied 
soul,  for  they  are  seen  to  accompany  it  at  the  times  of  death 
etc.,  as  is  stated  in  such  Vedic  texts:  “When  it  (the  soul)  departs, 
the  (chief)  Prifya  (vital  force)  follows;  when  the  vital  force 
departs,  all  the  Prdzias  (organs)  follow”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  2).  Hence 
although  the  deities  are  there,  presiding  over  the  organs,  yet 
the  embodied  soul  does  not  cease  to  be  the  experiencer;  for  the 
deities  are  to  be  classed  with  the  organs  and  not  with  the 
experiencing  souls.18 

Topic  8:  Prana  and  Pranas 

apipc  Apart  «srer^  from  the  chief  (Prana),  ^  they  (the  other 
pranas)  are  sfcgq-ifer  organs  on  account  of  being 

designated  thus. 

U  Unless  the  soul  be  one,  there  can  be  no  such  recognition  of  identity 
as,  “I  who  saw  the  colour  hear  the  music.” 

“In  the  body  earned  by  the  soul  by  its  past  actions. 

“Just  as  a  lamp  helps  the  eye,  so  also  Fire  helps  the  organ  of  vision. 
Similarly  in  other  cases.  The  lamp  has  no  experience,  neither  has  Fire, 
the  deity  of  the  eye. 


II.  iv.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  545 

11 .  As  distinguished  from  the  chief  Prana,  the  other  pranas 
(eleven  in  number)  are  the  organs,  for  they  are  so  designated . 

Doubt:  The  chief  Prana  which  is  one  and  the  other  eleven 
pranas  have  been  presented  in  order.  Here,  now,  crops  up 
another  doubt  whether  the  other  pranas  are  only  the  various 
modes  of  the  chief  Prana  or  they  are  independent  realities.  What 
is  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at  then? 

Opponent :  The  others  are  mere  modes  of  the  chief  Prana 
itself. 

How  is  this  known? 

From  the  Vedic  texts.  Thus  it  is  that  by  presenting  the  chief 
Pratia  and  the  other  pranas  in  close  proximity,  the  Upani$ad 
declares  that  the  others  are  identical  with  the  chief  Prana:  “Well, 
let  us  all  be  of  its  form,  saying  this  they  all  (the  organs)  assumed 
its  form”  (Bj*.  I.  v.  21).  Moreover,  the  word  prdya  is  common; 
and  hence  the  objects  denoted  by  it  are  ascertained  to  be  the 
same;  for  otherwise  the  word  prana  will  come  to  have  various 
meanings;  or  else  it  will  have  the  primary  meaning  at  one  place 
and  a  figurative  meaning  at  another,  all  which  is  improper. 
Hence  the  eleven  organs  of  speech  etc.  are  as  much  the  modes 
of  the  same  Prana  as  the  five  modes,  prana ,  apdna ,  etc.  are. 

Vedantin :  To  this  we  say  that  speech  etc.  are  really  inde¬ 
pendent  entities,  different  from  prana. 

Why? 

“Because  they  are  designated  separately.” 

In  what  does  this  difference  of  designation  consist? 

These  organs  ( pranas )  under  discussion,  which  remain  after 
leaving  aside  the  (chief)  Prana ,  are  called  the  eleven  organs,  for 
such  a  presentation  is  met  with  in  the  Vedic  texts.  In  such  texts 
as,  “From  Him  originates  Prana ,  as  well  as  the  mind  and  all  the 
organs”  (Mu.  II.  i.  3),  Prana  is  mentioned  separately,  and 
separately  are  mentioned  the  organs. 

Opponent :  If  such  be  the  line  of  argument,  then  the  mind 
like  (the  chief)  Prana  should  be  taken  out  of  the  organs,  for  it  is 
noticed  to  be  separately  mentioned  in  “the  mind  and  all  the 
organs”  (ibid). 

Vedantin  :  Quite  so;  but  in  the  Smjti  the  organs  are  counted 
35 


546  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [II.  iv.  17 

as  eleven,  and  hence  the  mind  also  is  accepted  to  be  an  organ 
like  those  of  hearing  etc.  But  Prana  is  not  recognized  as  an 
organ  either  in  the  Upani$ads  or  the  Smjtis.  And  this  difference 
in  designation  becomes  logical  if  there  is  a  substantial  distinc¬ 
tion.  But,  if  they  are  the  same  in  substance,  then  it  amounts  to  a 
contradiction  to  hold  that  the  very  same  Prana  sometimes  gets 
the  appellation  of  an  organ  and  sometimes  not.  Accordingly,  the 
other  organs  differ  in  substance  from  the  chief  Prana . 

Why,  again,  do  they  belong  to  a  different  category? 

11**11 

18.  Because  of  the  ( mention  of)  difference  in  the  Upani$ads. 

For  everywhere  in  the  Upani$ads  (the  chief)  Prana  is  men¬ 
tioned  separately  from  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  (In  the  Bjrhada- 
raoyaka  Upani$ad)  the  commencement  is  made  thus:  “They 
(the  organs)  said  to  the  organ  of  speech”  (Br.  I.  iii.  2);  then 
the  organs  of  speech  etc.  are  presented  as  being  struck  with  the 
evil  of  the  Asuras  (demons),  and  the  topic  of  the  organs  of 
speech  etc.  is  concluded;  after  that  the  chief  Pram ,  the  shatterer 
of  the  Asuras ,  is  presented  separately  in,  “Then  they  said  to  this 
chief  vital  force”  (Bf.  I.  iii.  7).  So  also  are  to  be  cited  the  other 
texts  about  difference,  such  as,  “(‘Three  He  designed  for 
Himself  means:)  The  mind,  the  organ  of  speech,  and  Prana 
(vital  force).  These  He  designed  for  Himself’  (Br.  I.  v.  3). 
From  this  also  it  follows  that  the  other  prams  (organs)  form  a 
category  different  from  the  chief  Pram • 

What  further  reason  is  there  for  their  being  different  in 
category? 

qwmw  llft.ll 

19.  And  (the  organs  are  different  from  Prana)  because  of  the 
dissimilarity  in  characteristics. 

Moreover,  there  is  a  dissimilarity  in  characteristics  between 
the  chief  PrSna  and  the  others.  When  the  organs  of  speech  etc. 
go  to  sleep,  the  chief  Prana  alone  keeps  awake;  and  it  alone 
is  beyond  the  grasp  of  Death  (i.e.  the  evil  of  attachment), 
whereas  the  others  are  within  Death’s  reach.  The  continuance 


n.  iv.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  547 

or  death  of  the  body  is  dependent  on  the  continuance  or  depar¬ 
ture  of  the  vital  force  and  not  of  the  other  organs.  The  organs 
are  the  causes  for  the  perception  of  their  objects,  but  not  so 
is  Prana .  There  are  many  other  differences  of  characteristics  of 
this  kind  between  (the  chief)  Prana  and  the  organs.  From  this 
also  it  is  proved  that  they  belong  to  different  categories. 

The  opinion  was  advanced  that  the  vital  force  itself  has 
become  the  organs  according  to  the  text,  “They  all  assumed  its 
form”  (Bf.  I.  v.  21);  that  is  illogical,  for  difference  becomes 
obvious  even  there  when  the  sequence  of  thought  in  the  topic 
as  a  whole  is  taken  into  consideration.  Thus  the  start  is  made 
with  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  in  the  text,  “The  organ  of 
speech  took  a  vow,  ‘I  will  go  on  speaking’”  (ibid.);  and  then 
it  is  stated  that  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  were  captured  by 
Death  in  the  form  of  fatigue  in  the  text,  “Death  captured  them 
in  the  form  of  fatigue.  Therefore  the  organ  of  speech  invariably 
gets  tired”  (ibid.).  Last  of  all  is  mentioned  the  vital  force 
separately  as  not  overwhelmed  by  Death  in  the  text,  “But 
Death  did  not  overtake  this  vital  force  in  the  body”  (ibid.).  Its 
superiority  is  affirmed  in,  “This  one  is  the  greatest  among  us” 
(ibid.).  So  in  conformity  with  all  this,  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  the  assumption  of  the  form  of  the  vital  force  by  the  organs 
of  speech  etc.  means  that  the  acquisition  of  their  power  of 
activity  is  dependent  on  Prana ,  but  it  does  not  mean  an  identity 
with  it.  From  this  fact  also,  it  becomes  established  that  the  word 
Prana  is  applied  to  the  organs  by  a  figure  of  speech.  And  just 
in  line  with  this  is  the  text,  “They  all  assumed  its  form.  There¬ 
fore  they  are  called  by  this  name  of  Prana”  (ibid.),  which  shows 
that  the  word  prana ,  denoting  the  chief  Prana ,  is  applied  to  the 
organs  by  a  figure  of  speech.  Therefore  the  organs  belong  to 
a  category  different  from  Prana. 

Topic  9:  Creation  of  gross  objects 

IRo|| 

The  arrangement  of  designation  and  shape  g 
however  (is)  by  Him  who  made  the  elements 

tripartite  for  (so)  it  is  taught. 


548  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iv.  20 

20.  The  arrangement  of  designation  and  shape ,  however ,  is 
by  Him  who  made  the  elements  tripartite,  for  it  is  taught  (in 
the  Upanifads). 

Doubt :  In  the  course  of  speaking  about  Existence-Brahman, 
the  creation  of  fire,  water,  and  food  (earth)  is  spoken  of,  and 
then  it  is  taught,  “That  Deity,  that  is  such,  deliberated,  ‘Well, 
let  me  manifest  names  and  forms  by  Myself  entering  into  these 
three  gods  as  their  individual  souls.  Let  Me  make  each  of  them 
tripartite’”  (a  mixture  of  the  three)  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2).  Here  the 
doubt  arises:  Is  this  manifestation  of  names  and  forms  an  act 
of  the  individual  soul  or  of  God? 

Opponent:  While  in  this  predicament,  the  conclusion  to  be 
arrived  at  is  that  this  evolving  of  names  and  forms  is  an  act  of 
the  individual  soul. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  qualifying  phrase,  “as  the  individual  soul”. 
Just  as  in  common  experience  it  is  seen  that  a  king  ascribes  to 
himself  the  act  of  estimating  the  enemy’s  strength  by  saying, 
“Let  me  enter  into  the  enemy’s  ranks  through  scouts  and  esti¬ 
mate  their  strength”,  where  he  uses  the  first  person  in,  “Let  me 
estimate”,  because  he  is  the  directing  agent  of  the  act  of  count¬ 
ing  by  the  scouts,  even  so  the  Deity  attributes  to  Himself  the 
act  of  evolving  names  and  forms  by  saying  in  the  first  person, 
“Let  Me  manifest”,  because  He  is  the  directing  agent  of  the 
(actual)  act  of  manifestation  by  the  individual  soul.  More¬ 
over,  it  is  seen  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  agent  in  such 
manifestations  as  the  coining  of  names  like  dittha  (a  wooden 
elephant),  davittha  (a  wooden  deer)  and  so  on,  as  also  the 
shaping  of  articles  like  a  pot  or  a  plate.  Therefore  this  manifesta¬ 
tion  is  an  act  of  the  individual  soul. 

Veddnttn:  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says,  “The 
arrangement  of  designation  and  shape,  however”  etc.  By  the 
word  “however”  is  refuted  the  opponent’s  point  of  view. 
“The  arrangement  of  designation  and  shape”  means  the  mani¬ 
festation  of  names  and  forms.  And  God  is  referred  to  in  “by 
Him  who  made  the  elements  tripartite”;14  for  in  the  matter  of 

54  Two-thirds  of  each  of  the  three  subtle  elements — fire,  water,  and 


II.  iv.  20]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  549 

creating  the  tripartites  His  agency  is  stated  to  be  indubitable. 
This  creation  of  names  and  this  creation  of  forms  such  as  fire, 
sun,  moon,  lightning,  etc.  (in  the  divine  context),  as  also  the 
creation  of  names  and  forms  for  every  individual  and  every 
species  like  Kusa  grass,  Ka£a  grass,  Pala&a  tree  etc.  (in  the 
material  context),  and  animals,  deer,  men,  and  others  (in  the 
corporeal  context),  must  be  an  act  of  God  who  created  fire, 
water,  and  earth. 

Why? 

“For  so  it  is  taught.”  Thus  by  opening  with  the  sentence, 
“That  Deity,  that  was  such,  deliberated”,  and  then  using  the 
first  person  in  the  statement,  “Let  Me  manifest  names  and 
forms,”  it  is  the  creatorship  of  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself  that 
is  taught  here. 

Opponent:  On  the  strength  of  the  use  of  the  qualifying 
phrase,  “as  this  individual  soul”,  it  has  been  ascertained  that  the 
manifestation  is  an  act  of  the  individual  soul. 

Vedantin :  This  is  not  so.  The  phrase  “as  this  individual  soul” 
is  to  be  construed  with  “by  Myself  entering  into”  and  not  with 
“Let  Me  manifest”,  for  the  former  is  in  immediate  proximity. 
Should  the  construction  be  with  the  latter,  the  use  of  the  first 
person,  as  referring  to  the  Deity,  in  “Let  Me  manifest”,  will 
have  to  be  imagined  to  be  figurative.  Moreover,  an  individual 
soul,  bereft  of  divinity  as  it  is,  has  no  power  of  creatorship 
with  regard  to  such  diverse  kinds  of  names  and  forms  as 
mountains,  rivers,  seas,  etc.  Even  in  the  case  of  those  things, 
with  regard  to  which  the  soul  has  any  power,  it  is  only  under 
God’s  dispensation  that  it  has  this.  And  there  is  no  such  thing 
as  an  individual  soul  absolutely  different  from  God,  like  a 
scout  from  the  king,  for  the  individual  is  described  as  “Myself*, 
the  state  of  individuality  being  contingent  on  the  conditioning 
factors  alone.  From  this  it  follows  that  even  if  this  revelation  of 
names  and  forms  be  an  act  of  the  individual,  it  is  really  an  act 
of  God.  Moreover,  the  conclusion  arrived  at  in  all  the  Upani§ads 
is  that  God  alone  is  the  revealer  of  names  and  forms,  as  is  evident 

earth — are  mixed  with  one-sixth  of  each  of  the  other  two  to  form  the 
three  gross  elements  perceived  by  us.  This  process  is  technically  called 
trivrtkarana . 


550  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [II.  iv.  20 

from  such  texts  as,  “That  which  is  called  Space  (Brahman)  is 
surely  the  accomplisher  of  name  and  form”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1). 
Therefore,  the  manifestation  of  names  and  forms  is  surely  an 
act  of  God  who  brought  about  the  intermixture  of  the  three 
elements.  And  it  is  the  intention  here  to  declare  that  the  revela¬ 
tion  of  names  and  forms  was  preceded  by  the  making  of  each 
element  tripartite,  for  in  the  very  statement  of  the  origin  of 
fire,  water,  and  earth  is  implied  the  manifestation  of  the  name 
and  form  of  each  one  of  them.  That  fact  of  making  tripartite 
is  shown  by  the  Upani§ad  in  the  case  of  fire,  sun,  moon,  light¬ 
ning,  etc.  in  “That  which  is  the  red  glow  of  (gross)  fire  is  the 
colour  of  (the  subtle  element)  fire;  that  which  is  the  white 
glow  of  (gross)  fire,  is  the  colour  of  (the  subtle  element)  water; 
that  which  is  the  dark  (i.e.  gray)  glow  of  (gross)  fire,  is  the 
colour  of  (the  subtle  element)  earth”  etc.  (Ch.  VI.  iv.  1).  In 
the  case  of  fire,  the  form  fire  is  first  revealed.  And  when  the 
form  is  manifested,  an  object  comes  to  exist,  and  then  the  name 
fire  is  revealed  for  it.  This  is  how  it  is  to  be  understood  in  the 
cases  of  the  sun,  moon,  lightning,  etc.  And  through  this  illus¬ 
tration  of  fire  is  shown  the  process  of  making  tripartite  all  the 
three  kinds  of  products,  earth,  water,  and  fire;  for  the  com¬ 
mencement  and  conclusion  of  the  topic  are  common  to  all  the 
three.  To  elaborate  this:  The  opening  is  made  from  a  common 
standpoint  in  the  passage,  “Each  of  these  three  deities  becomes 
tripartite”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  4),  and  the  conclusion  is  also  made  from 
a  common  standpoint  in  the  passage  commencing  with,  “That 
which  appeared  (in  the  gross  product)  as  though  red  was  the 
colour  of  (subtle)  fire”,  and  ending  with,  “And  that  which 
appeared  as  though  non-descript  was  the  combination  of  those 
alone”  (Ch.  VI.  iv.  6-7). 

Taking  for  granted  that  these  three  deities  have  their  external 
state  of  tripartite  existence,  another  state  of  tripartite  existence 
for  them  in  the  bodily  context  was  stated  in,  “These  three  deities 
undergo  a  triple  conglomeration  when  they  reach  the  state  of 
men”  (Ch.  VI.  iv.  7).  This  very  fact  is  now  being  shown  by 
the  teacher  (Vyasa),  in  accordance  with  the  Upani$ad  itself, 
with  a  view  to  removing  some  defect  that  may  be  suspected 
here: 


II.iv.22]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  5J1 

tmnft  vrfa  ir*ii 

jjTO-anfe  Flesh  etc.  (are)  produced  from  earth 

as  shown  in  the  Upani§ads;  from  the  other  two  ^  as  well. 

21.  Flesh  etc .  are  produced  from  earth  as  it  is  shown  in  the 
Upam$ads.  From  the  other  two  as  well  (evolve  other  things). 

According  to  the  process  shown  in  the  scriptures,  such  prod¬ 
ucts  as  flesh  are  generated  from  earth  after  it  has  become  tri¬ 
partite  and  is  eaten  by  men.  Thus  there  is  the  Upani$adic  text, 
“Food  when  eaten  becomes  divided  into  three  parts.  That  which 
is  the  grossest  constituent  of  it  becomes  excreta;  that  which  is 
the  medium,  becomes  flesh;  and  that  which  is  the  subtlest 
becomes  the  mind”  (Ch.  VI.  v.  1).  The  idea  is  that  it  is  but 
the  gross  earth  (made  tripartite)  that  is  eaten  in  the  form  of 
rice,  barley,  etc.  Of  that  earth  the  grossest  part  goes  out  in  the 
form  of  excreta.  The  medium  portion  builds  up  the  flesh  in 
the  body;  and  the  subtlest  portion  develops  the  mind.  It  is  to  be 
understood  in  accordance  with  the  scriptures  that  the  products 
of  water  and  fire  also  develop  similarly.  Thus  urine,  blood,  and 
prana  evolve  out  of  water,  while  bone,  marrow,  and  the  organ 
of  speech  are  the  products  of  fire. 

Here  the  opponent  says  that  if  in  accordance  with  the  text, 
“He  made  each  of  them  tripartite”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  4),  which  speaks 
equally  for  all,  it  be  the  case  that  the  elements  and  elementals  are 
all  tripartite,  then  from  what  do  such  special  designations  follow 
as  “This  is  fire”,  “This  is  water”,  “This  is  earth”,  as  also  such 
references  in  the  bodily  context  as  “These  flesh  etc.  are  the 
products  of  the  food  (earth)  eaten”,  “The  blood  etc.  are  the 
products  of  the  water  drunk”,  and  “The  bone  etc.  are  the  prod¬ 
ucts  of  the  fire  (i.e.  butter  etc.)  eaten?” 

Vedantin  :  With  regard  to  this  it  is  said, 

dSWWiK:  IR^Il 

g  But  owing  to  preponderance  (occurs)  the 

(corresponding)  designation  of  that,  (occurs)  that  cor¬ 

responding  designation. 


552  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  RHA$YA  [II.  iv.  22 

22.  But  owing  to  the  preponderance  (of  any  one)  occurs  the 
corresponding  designation ,  occurs  the  corresponding  designa¬ 
tion . 

By  the  word  “but”  is  refuted  the  objection  raised.  The 
abstract  noun  from  vise$a  is  vaise§ya,  which  means  preponderance. 
Although  the  process  of  making  everything  tripartite  has  taken 
place,  still  some  elemental  substance  is  found  to  preponderate 
in  something,  as  for  instance,  in  fire  there  is  a  preponderance  of 
fire,  in  water  there  is  a  preponderance  of  water,  and  in  earth 
there  is  a  preponderance  of  earth.  This  process  of  triple  combi¬ 
nation  is  undertaken  for  the  sake  of  making  possible  human 
dealings  (i.e.  phenomenal  existence).  Had  the  three  elements 
formed  into  a  single  whole  like  the  three  strands  of  a  rope 
twisted  into  one,  no  distinctive  result  could  have  been  derived 
by  human  beings  from  the  three  elements  separately.  Hence 
though  there  is  this  triple  intermixture,  these  particular  designa¬ 
tions  of  fire,  water,  and  earth  in  the  cases  of  both  the  elements 
and  the  elementals,  follow  from  the  preponderance  of  each. 
The  repetition  of  the  phrase  “corresponding  designation”  indi¬ 
cates  that  the  present  Chapter  is  ended. 


CHAPTER  III 


SADHANA— SPIRITUAL  PRACTICE 
Section  I 

Introduction :  In  the  Second  Chapter  have  been  answered  the 
objections  that  can  be  raised  from  the  standpoints  of  the  Smjtis 
and  logic  against  the  realization  of  Brahman  as  propounded  in 
the  Upani$ads.  It  has  been  explained  why  the  views  of  others 
should  be  ignored.  The  conflict  of  Upani$adic  passages  has  also 
been  removed.  It  has  further  been  stated  therein  that  all  entities, 
except  the  individual  souls,  which  are  the  means  for  the  souls’ 
experiences,  emanate  from  Brahman.  Now  in  this  Third  Chapter 
will  be  considered  these  subjects.  The  mode  of  transmigration 
of  the  individual  soul,  conditioned  as  it  is  by  these  paraphernalia; 
its  other  states;  the  nature  of  Brahman;  the  difference  or  non¬ 
difference  of  meditations;  the  assemblage  or  non-assemblage  of 
the  attributes;  the  attainment  of  the  highest  human  goal  through 
complete  knowledge;  the  difference  among  the  injunctions  for 
the  methods  of  complete  knowledge;  and  absence  of  any  grada¬ 
tion  in  the  state  of  liberation  (attained  during  the  birth  in  which 
the  means  of  knowledge  are  adopted).  Besides,  some  other  topics 
will  be  discussed  that  crop  up  in  connection  with  these.  Of 
these  subjects,  the  different  courses  of  transmigration  are  shown 
in  the  first  section  by  confining  the  attention  to  the  meditation 
on  the  five  fires;  and  this  is  done  for  generating  dispassion,1  for 
the  Upani$ad  says  at  the  end,  “Therefore  one  should  hate  this”2 

The  first  section  will  deal  with  dispassion.  Through  a  consideration 
of  the  states  of  dream  etc.  the  second  section  will  ascertain  the  nature 
of  the  individual  and  Brahman.  The  third  will  determine  the  meaning 
of  the  mahavakyas  and  discuss  the  different  kinds  of  meditation.  And 
the  fourth  will  discuss  liberation. 

2  Since  transmigration,  following  as  a  result  of  work,  is  an  evil,  the 
enlightened  man  should  have  a  repulsion  for  the  results  of  works.  This  is 
said  at  the  end  of  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires. 


554 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.i.1 


(Ch.  V.  x.  8).  It  has  already  been  known  that  when  the  individ¬ 
ual  soul  leaves  the  previous  body  and  attains  another,  it  is 
helped  by  the  chief  Praria,  it  is  accompanied  by  the  senses  and 
the  mind,  and  it  has  ignorance,  results  of  past  actions,  and  the 
tendencies  acquired  in  the  previous  birth  as  its  main  prop.  This 
conclusion  is  arrived  at  from  the  passage  starting  with,  “When 
the  soul  becomes  weak  and  senseless,  as  it  were,  the  organs 
come  to  it”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  1),  and  ending  with,  “So  does  the  soul 
throw  this  body  away,  or  make  it  senseless,  and  creates  another, 
a  newer  and  better,  form  (i.e.  body)”  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  4),  which 
deals  with  the  subject  of  transmigration.  And  this  is  true,  because 
it  becomes  possible  thus  to  experience  the  results  of  virtue  and 
vice. 


Topic  1:  Departure  from  the  body 

Doubt :  Now  it  has  to  be  considered  whether  the  transmigrat¬ 
ing  soul  moves  out  from  this  body  without  being  surrounded 
by  the  (mixed)  subtle  elements  which  are  the  seed  of  the  next 
body,  or  it  goes  surrounded  by  them.  What  should  be  the  con¬ 
clusion  to  be  arrived  at? 

Opponent :  It  goes  without  being  surrounded. 

How  is  this  known? 

For  unlike  the  soul’s  taking  up  the  particles  of  light  (i.e. 
organs),  it  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Upani§ads  that  the  elements 
are  also  taken  up  (at  the  time  of  departure).  In  the  text,  “com¬ 
pletely  withdrawing  these  particles  of  light  it  comes  to  the 
heart”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  1),  the  taking  up  of  the  organs  is  mentioned 
by  the  term  “particles  of  light”;  for  in  the  complementary  text 
are  mentioned  the  sense-organs  like  that  of  vision  (ibid.);  but 
there  is  no  such  mention  of  the  taking  up  of  the  particles  of 
elements.  Moreover,  the  particles  of  elements  are  easy  to  get, 
they  being  present  wherever  the  new  body  is  to  be  formed. 
And  hence  it  is  unnecessary  to  carry  them  over.  Therefore  the 
soul  goes  without  being  surrounded  by  them. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  teacher  (Vyasa) 
advances  the  aphorism: 


m.  i.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  555 

dfrTKMFdMTft  wfawriwiij  ll?l! 

^-sn^R-srRnTrft  In  the  matter  of  obtaining  the  next  one,  (the 
soul)  moves  out  enveloped  (by  subtle  ele¬ 

ments),  (as  is  known)  yy-pH5qpnyqr*T  from  the  question  and 
its  solution. 

1.  In  the  matter  of  obtaining  the  next  one  (i.e.  body)y  the 
individual  soul  moves  out  enveloped  (by  the  subtle  elements ), 
for  so  it  is  known  from  the  question  and  its  solution. 

It  is  to  be  understood  that  “in  the  matter  of  obtaining  the 
next  one,  the  individual  soul  moves  out”,  that  is  to  say,  when 
acquiring  a  fresh  body  after  leaving  the  present  one,  it  sallies 
forth  enveloped  by  the  subtle  parts  of  the  mixed  elements,  which 
are  the  seed  of  the  next  body. 

How  is  this  known? 

“From  the  question  and  its  solution”.  Thus  there  occurs  the 
question,  “Do  you  know  (O  Svetaketu),  how  the  water  (i.e. 
the  liquid  that  is  poured  as  oblation  in  the  five  fires),  comes 
to  be  called  man  after  the  fifth  oblation  is  poured?”  (Ch.  V. 
iii.  3).  The  solution  of  the  question  is  in  its  answer  (by 
Pravahana  Jaivali).  The  five  oblations,  viz  faith,  moon,  rain, 
food,  and  semen,  are  shown  as  poured  into  the  five  fires,  viz 
heaven,  rain-god,  earth,  man,  and  woman;  and  then  the  ques¬ 
tion  is  answered  by  saying,  “Thus  indeed  the  water  comes  to 
be  called  a  man  in  the  fifth  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  ix.  1).  Therefore 
it  is  understood  that  the  soul  goes  out  enveloped  by  water. 

Opponent :  But  another  Upani$adic  text  shows  that  the  soul 
does  not  leave  the  earlier  body  so  long  as  it  does  not  get  hold 
of  another  like  a  leech:  “Just  as  a  leech  supported  on  a  straw 
goes  to  the  end  of  it,  takes  hold  of  another  support,  and  con¬ 
tracts  itself,  so  does  the  soul  throw  this  body  aside,  take  hold 
of  another  support  and  contract  itself”  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  3). 

Vedantin :  There  is  no  contradiction  even  here;  for  the  point 
brought  out  through  the  analogy  of  the  leech  is  that  to  the 
soul,  remaining  still  surrounded  by  the  subtle  elements,  occur 
such  thoughts  about  the  future  body  as  are  called  up  by  the 
accumulated  results  of  past  actions;  and  this  expectancy  becomes 


556  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  i.  1 

lengthened  out  to  the  next  body  like  a  leech.3  This  being  the 
manner  of  acquiring  a  fresh  body,  as  shown  by  the  Upani$ads, 
all  other  theories  arising  from  the  human  intellect,  such  for 
instance  as,  (the  Sarhkhya  theory)  that  when  the  all-pervasive 
senses  and  soul  acquire  a  new  body  as  a  result  of  past  actions, 
they  start  functioning  there  itself;  or  (the  Buddhist  theory) 
that  the  soul  alone,  by  itself,  acquires  its  function  there,  while 
the  senses,  just  as  much  as  the  body,  are  born  afresh  in  those 
different  spheres  of  experience;  or  (the  Vaisesika  view)  that 
the  mind  alone  proceeds  to  the  new  place  of  experience;  or 
(the  Jaina  view)  that  the  soul  alone  jumps  from  one  body  to 
another  like  a  parrot  from  one  tree  to  another — all  these  are 
to  be  ignored  as  running  counter  to  the  Vedic  view. 

Opponent :  From  the  question  and  answer  cited  above,  we 
gather  that  the  soul  goes  out  accompanied  by  water  alone;  for 
this  conclusion  is  borne  upon  us  by  the  Vedic  mention  of  the 
word  water.  So  how  is  it  asserted  in  a  general  way  that  it  goes 
out  along  with  the  subtle  parts  of  all  the  (mixed)  elements? 

Vedantin  :  Hence  comes  the  reply: 

IRII 

$  But  (the  soul  is  not  enveloped  by  water  alone) 
it  having  three  components;  (water  is  mentioned), 
owing  to  preponderance. 

2.  But  the  soul  is  not  enveloped  by  water  done ,  since  water 
has  three  co??tponents;  water  is  mentioned  because  of  its  pre¬ 
ponderance . 

By  the  word  “but”  is  demolished  the  objection  raised.  Water 
consists  of  three  components,  according  to  the  Upani$adic  text 
about  the  elements  becoming  tripartite  (Ch.  VI.  iii).  So  when 
water  it  admitted  as  the  constituent  (of  the  body),  the  other 
two  elements  must  be  admitted  pari  passu.  Moreover,  the  body 
is  a  product  of  the  three  elements,  since  all  the  three,  viz  fire, 

•Death  pangs  make  one  forget  the  present  body  etc.  Past  actions  then 
create  in  the  soul  a  dream-like  expectancy  of  the  future  body — or  a 
body  made  of  thought.  The  soul  mentally  attaches  itself  to  that  body. 


III.  i.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  557 

water,  and  earth,  are  seen  to  be  involved  in  its  making.  In 
another  way  also  it  is  constituted  by  three  things;  for  it  is 
constituted  by  the  three  humours,  viz  bile,  phlegm,  and  wind. 
Such  a  body  cannot  be  constituted  by  water  alone  by  rejecting 
the  other  elements.  Hence  the  word  “water”  found  in  the 
question  and  answer  in,  “water  comes  to  be  called  man”  (Ch. 
V.  iii.  3,  V.  ix.  1),  is  used  because  of  its  predominance,  and 
not  to  imply  water  alone;  for  in  all  the  bodies,  liquids  such  as 
secretions,  blood,  etc.  abide  in  abundance. 

Opponent :  The  earthly  (solid)  substance  is  seen  to  pre¬ 
dominate  in  the  bodies. 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect;  for  water  is  found  to  be  in 
greater  proportion  than  the  rest  of  the  elements  (other  than 
earth);  moreover,  in  blood  (i.e.  ovum)  and  semen,  forming  the 
seed  of  the  body,  the  liquid  portion  is  seen  to  predominate. 
Again,  past  actions  are  the  efficient  cause  for  the  production  of 
the  next  body;  and  these  activities  in  the  form  of  such  sacrifices 
as  Agnihotra,  depend  on  such  liquid  substances  as  Soma,  clarified 
butter,  milk,  etc.  Besides,  it  will  be  stated  in  a  later  text  that 
this  water  (i.e.  liquid),  referred  to  by  the  word  “faith”,  and 
invariably  associated  with  rites,  is  poured  as  oblation  in  the 
(first)  fire  that  is  heaven.4  For  this  reason  also  water  is  known 
to  be  preponderant.  And  because  of  this  preponderance,  all  the 
subtle  parts  of  the  mixed  elements,  constituting  the  seed  of  the 
body,  are  referred  to  by  the  word  water.  Thus  there  is  no 
defect. 


siFPi%«r  \\y\ 

5.  And  from  the  going  out  of  the  organs  (it  follows  that  the 
elements  also  move  out). 

And  the  Upani$ads  speak  of  the  departure  of  the  organs  at 

4  Water  (i.e.  liquids)  is  a  means  for  the  performance  of  the  rites,  and 
is  thus  associated  with  them.  After  being  poured  as  oblation,  it  assumes 
a  subtle  (potential)  form,  moves  about  by  virtue  of  its  subsistence  in 
the  soul,  and  is  called  “faith”  (potential  result  of  rites).  That  faith,  along 
with  the  impressions  of  past  rites,  first  fire,  is  poured  as  oblation  in  the 
heaven,  and  thus  it  produces  a  lunar  body. 


558  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  L  3 

the  time  of  reincarnation,  in  such  texts  as,  “When  it  (the  soul) 
departs,  the  vital  force  follows,  when  the  vital  force  departs,  all 
the  organs  follow”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  2).  But  since  the  moving  out  of 
the  organs  is  not  possible  unless  they  have  something  as  their 
support,  it  becomes  evident  that  to  make  the  motion  of  the 
organs  possible,  water  too,  which  is  their  material  basis,  moves 
out  with  them  in  association  with  the  other  elements.  For  the 
organs  cannot  either  go  or  stay  anywhere  unless  they  have  a 
material  support,  since  this  is  not  noticed  in  any  living  creature. 

iivii 

srpr^-Brrf^-^T-^:  On  account  of  the  Upani$adic  statement 
about  repairing  to  Fire  and  others,  if  this  be  the 

objection,  q-  not  so,  (that  statement)'  being  meta¬ 

phorical. 

4.  7f  it  be  objected  (that  the  organs  do  not  accompany  the 
soul  at  the  time  of  death)  since  the  Upanifadic  texts  mention 
their  entry  into  (the  deities)  Fire  and  others ,  then  we  say ,  not 
so,  for  that  is  said  in  a  secondary  sense . 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  the  organs  do  not  go  with 
the  soul  at  the  time  of  reincarnation,  for  they  are  shown  in  the 
Upani$ads  as  going  to  Fire  and  others.  Thus  the  text  beginning 
with,  “When  the  vocal  organ  of  a  man  who  dies  is  merged  in 
Fire,  the  nose  (i.e.  sense  of  smell)  in  Air”  (Bj\  III.  ii.  13),  shows 
that  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  merge  in  such  deities  as  Fire. 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  that  occurs  in  a  secondary  sense.  The 
Upani$adic  mention  of  the  merger  of  speech  etc.  in  Fire  etc. 
is  figurative,  for  this  is  not  seen  in  the  case  of  the  hair  of  the 
body  and  head,  though  the  relevant  text  there  is,  “the  hair  of 
the  body  (merges)  in  the  herbs,  that  of  the  head  in  the  trees” 
(ibid.).  For  it  is  not  possible  for  the  hair  of  the  body  and  head 
to  fly  away  from  the  body  and  reach  the  herbs  and  trees. 
Besides,  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  of  any  going  for  the  soul 
if  it  be  denied  that  the  organs  follow  it  as  its  conditioning 
factors;  nor  can  the  soul  have  any  experience  in  the  next  body 
in  the  absence  of  the  organs.  Moreover,  in  other  texts  it  is 


III.  i.  5 ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  559 

clearly  stated  that  the  soul  goes  elsewhere  along  with  the  organs 
(Bj\  IV.  iv.  2).  Accordingly,  having  the  fact  in  view  that  Fire 
and  other  deities,  presiding  over  speech  and  the  rest  and  helping 
them  in  their  activities,  cease  to  favour  them  thus  at  the  time 
of  death,  it  is  said  in  a  figurative  way  that  speech  etc.  enter  into 
Fire  etc. 


?IT  ^  W\ 

5PT^  In  the  first  instance  apsppjrrcT  not  having  been  heard 
if  this  be  the  objection,  not  so,  that  (water) 

itself  (is  meant)  because  0f  reasonableness. 

J.  If  it  be  objected  (that  water  does  not  come  to  be  known 
as  man),  since  it  is  not  heard  of  in  the  first  instance ,  then  not 
so,  for  on  logical  grounds,  water  itself  is  meant . 

Opponent :  Granted  even  that  this  is  so,  how  can  it  be  ascer¬ 
tained  that  “water  comes  to  be  known  as  man  in  the  fifth 
oblation”  (Ch.  V.  ix.  .1),  for  water  is  not  heard  of  in  connection 
with  the  first  fire  (heaven)?  In  this  context  the  five  fires,  heaven 
and  the  rest,  are  mentioned  as  the  receivers  of  the  five  oblations. 
In  the  course  of  enumerating  them,  the  introduction  is  made 
with,  “O  Gautama,  the  other  world  (heaven)  is  indeed  a  fire” 
(Ch.  V.  iv.  1),  and  then  it  is  said,  “In  this  fire  that  is  such,  the 
gods  pour  faith  as  an  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  iv.  2),  where  faith  is 
presented  as  the  thing  to  be  offered,  but  water  is  mentioned 
there  as  an  offering.  If  you  want  to  imagine  that  water  is  the 
oblation  offered  in  the  four  succeeding  fires  starting  with  the 
Rain-god,  you  may  very  well  do  so,  for  Soma  and  the  other 
things  adopted  for  being  offered  in  those  fires  have  a  preponder¬ 
ance  of  water.  But  it  is  an  unwarranted  boldness  to  reject  faith 
which  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad  and  imagine  water  instead 
which  is  not  mentioned  as  an  offering  in  the  case  of  the  first 
fire.  And  faith  means  a  kind  of  disposition  (or  attitude),  for 
that  is  its  usual  purport.  Hence  it  is  unreasonable  to  say  that 
water  gets  the  name  of  man  in  the  fifth  oblation. 


560  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [in.  i.  5 

Vedantin :  This  is  nothing  damaging,  since  that  very  “water 
is  mentioned  by  the  word  faith”  in  connection  with  the  first 
fire. 

How  so? 

“On  logical  grounds”.  Because  on  such  an  interpretation 
alone,  this  whole  topic  reduces  itself  to  an  unequivocal  single 
idea  running  consistently  through  the  beginning,  middle,  and 
end  of  the  topic.  On  a  contrary  supposition,  again,  this  unity 
of  idea  (i.e.  syntactical  harmony)  will  be  set  at  naught,  since 
the  question  will  relate  to  one  thing  and  the  answer  to  another, 
inasmuch  as  the  question  relates  to  how  water  becomes  known 
as  man  in  the  fifth  oblation,  whereas  during  the  course  of  the 
reply  a  thing  called  faith  which  is  other  than  water  is  introduced 
as  the  offering  in  the  first  oblation.  And  the  conclusion  made 
with  the  words,  “In  this  way  indeed  water  comes  to  be  known 
as  man”  (Ch.  V.  ix.  1),  confirms  this  conclusion.  Besides,  the 
products  of  faith,  viz  Soma,  rain,  etc.,  are  noticed,  as  they 
become  gross,  to  have  a  preponderance  of  liquidity;  that  too  is  a 
pointer  to  faith  itself  being  a  liquid,  for  the  effect  conforms  to 
the  cause.  Moreover,  the  attitude  called  faith,  whether  it  be  an 
attribute  of  the  soul  or  the  mind,  cannot  be  separated  from 
the  possessor  of  the  attribute  like  the  hearts  etc.  from  the  animals 
to  be  offered  as  oblation;  and  thus  water  alone  should  be  the 
meaning  of  faith  (here).  Moreover,  the  word  faith  becomes 
appropriate  with  regard  to  water,  for  such  a  Vedic  use  is  met 
with  in,  “Faith  indeed  is  water”  (Tai.  S.  I.  vi.  8-9).  Besides, 
water  becomes  the  seed  of  a  fresh  body  by  attaining  a  subtleness 
like  that  of  faith;  hence  also  it  can  be  called  faith,  even  as  a 
man  having  the  prowess  of  a  lion  is  called  leonine.  Again,  since 
water  is  associated  with  the  rites  performed  with  faith,  it  is  but 
appropriate  that  the  word  faith  should  be  applied  to  water  on 
the  analogy  of  a  man  shouting  out  from  a  platform  being  refer¬ 
red  to  by  saying,  “The  platform  is  shouting”.  Furthermore, 
water  can  be  called  faith,  since  it  is  the  cause  of  faith,  as  is 
evident  from  the  Vedic  text,  “It  is  (holy)  water  that  (by  its 
very  sight)  generates  faith  in  him  for  the  performance  of 
virtuous  deeds  (like  bathing).” 


III.  i.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  561 

3mdrcufefd  sraft:  \\%\\ 

On  account  of  not  being  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ads 
it  be  said  so,  (then)  ^  not  so,  snrft:  since  it  is 
perceived  (to  be  so)  ^-snfe-frlP^TT^  in  the  case  of  the  per¬ 
formers  of  sacrifices  etc. 

6 .  If  it  be  argued  ( that  the  soul  does  not  depart  enveloped  by 
water)  since  it  is  not  mentioned  thus  in  the  Upani$ads,  then  not 
so,  for  it  is  perceived  to  be  so  in  the  case  of  those  who  perform 
sacrifices  etc .  (i.e.  it  can  be  verified  by  what  happens  to  the 
sacrificers). 

Opponent :  Even  if  it  be  conceded  from  a  consideration  of 
the  question  and  answer  that  water  itself,  being  offered  as  faith 
etc.  in  succession,  assumes  a  human  form  during  the  fifth  obla¬ 
tion,  still  it  is  not  ascertained  that  the  individual  souls  go  out 
enveloped  by  water,  for  this  is  not  heard  of  in  the  Vedic  texts. 
We  do  not  find  any  word  in  this  context  to  denote  the  souls, 
like  the  word  used  to  denote  water.  Hence  your  statement  that 
the  “soul  departs  from  the  body,  enveloped  by  the  subtle  parts 
of  the  mixed  elements”  (B.  S.  III.  i.  1)  is  illogical. 

Vedantin  :  This  is  nothing  damaging. 

How? 

“Because  it  is  perceived  to  be  so  in  the  case  of  those  who 
perform  sacrifices  etc.”  For  starting  with  the  text,  “Again,  those 
who  living  in  villages  perform  sacrifices,  humanitarian  works 
and  charity,  etc.  (and  meditate  on  the  five  fires)  proceed  along 
the  path  of  smoke”  (Ch.  V.  x.  3),  it  is  shown  that  the  performers 
of  sacrifices  etc.  reach  the  moon  by  proceeding  along  smoke 
etc.  constituting  the  path  of  the  manes:  “From  space  they  reach 
the  moon,  which  is  king  (or  the  shining)  Soma”  (Ch.  V.  x.  4). 
Those  very  individuals  are  in  evidence  here  as  well  (in  the 
context  under  discussion);  for  there  is  a  similarity  with  the 
text,  “In  this  fire,  that  is  such,  the  gods  pour  faith  as  an  oblation. 
From  that  oblation  arises  king  (or  the  shining)  Soma”  (Ch.  V. 
iv.  2).  And  those  (performers  of  sacrifices)  are  seen  directly  to 
possess  water  in  the  form  of  curd,  milk,  etc.,  which  are  the 
means  for  the  accomplishment  of  such  rites  as  Agnihotra,  Dar£a- 
36 


562 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.  i.  6 


purgamasa,  etc.,  for  curd  etc.  are  mainly  liquid.  When  these 
are  offered  in  the  Ahavanlya  fire,  they  assume  the  form  of  the 
subtle  unseen  results  of  rites,  and  come  to  rest  on  those  per¬ 
formers  of  the  sacrifices  etc.  Their  (dead)  bodies  are  offered 
by  the  priests  to  the  last  fire  (for  cremation)  in  accordance 
with  the  rules  of  last  rites  while  reciting  the  mantra,  “Let  such- 
and-such  a  performer  of  rites  proceed  to  heaven.  Svdhdl”  Then 
those  waters,  or  the  liquid  oblations  associated  with  the  rites 
performed  with  faith,  become  the  unseen  potency  of  the  rites 
performed,  and  envelop  the  beings  who  had  performed  those 
sacrifices  etc.,  and  carry  them  to  the  other  world  for  the  frui¬ 
tion  of  their  acts.  This  fact  is  mentioned  here  (Ch.  V.  iv.  2) 
by  the  term  “pours  as  oblation*’  in  the  text,  “He  pours  faith  as 
an  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  iv.  2,  Bf.  VI.  ii.  9).  So  also  by  the  sentences 
starting  with,  “These  oblations,  when  they  are  poured,  rise  up” 
(§.  B.  VI.  ii.  6),  that  occur  at  the  end  of  the  topic  of  Agnihotra 
by  way  of  summing  up  the  six  questions  and  answers  (with 
regard  to  Agnihotra),  it  is  shown  that  the  two  oblations  poured 
in  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  (in  the  morning  and  evening)  pro¬ 
ceed  to  the  other  world  for  their  fruition.5  Therefore,  the 
individual  souls  depart  from  the  body  enveloped  by  the  water 
that  is  nothing  but  the  oblations. 

Opponent :  How  again  can  this  be  asserted  that  the  per¬ 
formers  of  sacrifices  etc.  move  out  for  experiencing  the  results 
of  their  own  work,  since  it  is  shown  in  the  text  that  after 
reaching  the  moon  through  the  path  symbolized  by  smoke,  they 
turn  into  food:  “This  is  the  moon,  the  king  (or  the  shining  one), 
which  is  the  food  of  the  gods.  The  gods  eat  it”  (Ch.  V.  x.  4). 
There  is  also  another  text  of  the  same  purport:  “Reaching  the 
moon,  they  become  food.  There  the  gods  enjoy  them  like  the 

“Janaka  asks  Yajnavalkya  six  questions  about  the  Agnihotra:  “Do  you 
know  how  the  two  oblations  in  the  morning  and  evening — (1)  rise  upt 
(2)  move,  (3)  bring  about  establishment,  and  (4)  satisfaction,  and  (5) 
return,  and  how  (6)  the  body  takes  form?  Yajnavalkya  replies,  “(1) 
These  two  oblations  rise  up  after  being  offered,  (2)  then  they  go  to 
heaven  through  the  sky,  (3)  they  establish  the  Ahavanlya  as  heaven,  (4) 
they  satisfy  heaven,  (5)  then  they  return  from  there  and  are  poured  in 
the  bodies  of  man  and  woman,  and  then  (6)  they  assume  human  form.” 


III.  i.  7]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  563 

priests  drinking  the  shining  Soma  juice  (repeatedly  saying  as  it 
were),  ‘Be  filled  up,  be  emptied’  ”6  (Bf.  VI.  ii.  16).  And  it  is 
not  possible  for  those  to  have  any  enjoyment  who  are  being 
eaten  up  by  the  gods  as  though  by  tigers. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  answer  is: 


IIV9II 


Or  rather  it  is  figurative  on  account 

of  non-realization  of  the  Self;  because  thus  the 

Upani$ad  shows. 


7.  Or  rather  the  statement  ( that  the  souls  become  the  food  of 
gods)  is  made  in  a  metaphorical  sense  on  account  of  their  non¬ 
realization  of  the  Self.  For  the  Upani§ad  shows  the  same. 

The  phrase  “or  rather”  is  used  for  obviating  the  defect  shown. 
That  they  become  food  is  only  in  a  metaphorical  and  not  pri¬ 
mary  sense.  For  if  the  literal  sense  be  implied,  then  such  texts  as, 
“One  desiring  heaven  should  perform  a  sacrifice”  which  enun¬ 
ciate  the  competence  for  the  performer,  will  become  nullified. 
For  if  the  performers  of  sacrifices  etc.  do  not  get  any  enjoy¬ 
ment  in  the  lunar  world,  why  should  those  who  are  qualified 
for  them,  undertake  the  rites  involving  great  effort?  Moreover, 
the  word  food  is  seen  to  be  used  figuratively  with  regard  to 
things  that  are  not  food,  simply  because  of  the  similarity  of 
producing  enjoyment,  as  for  instance  in,  “The  subjects  are  the 
food  for  kings,  and  the  cattle  are  the  food  for  the  subjects”.  So 
what  is  meant  by  “the  eating  by  the  gods”  is  the  enjoyment 
of  the  happy  companionship  of  those  who  have  performed 
sacrifices  etc.  and  are  now  under  their  subjugation,  like  the  people 
in  this  earth  enjoying  the  companionship  of  beloved  wives,  sons, 
friends,  and  others  who  hold  subordinate  positions.  But  no  such 
thing  as  munching  or  swallowing  of  sweets  is  meant.  For  masti¬ 
cation  etc.  are  denied  in  the  case  of  the  gods  in  the  text,  “The 
gods  do  not  certainly  eat  or  drink,  but  they  become  satisfied 
simply  by  witnessing  this  nectar”  (Ch.  III.  vi-x).  And  even  as 


They  drink  cup  after  cup  of  Soma,  filling  it  and  emptying  it. 


564 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[III.  i.  7 


the  followers  of  a  king,  depending  on  him  for  their  subsistence, 
can  still  have  individual  enjoyment,  so  also  those  performers  of 
sacrifices  etc.  who  become  subservient  to  the  gods,  can  still  have 
their  individual  enjoyment.  Moreover,  it  is  reasonable  that  the 
performers  of  sacrifices  etc.  should  become  objects  of  enjoy¬ 
ment  to  the  gods  since  they  are  unenlightened.  Thus  it  is  that 
the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  the  unenlightened  men  becoming  objects 
of  enjoyment  to  the  gods:  “While  he  who  worships  another 
god  thinking,  ‘He  is  one  and  I  am  another,’  does  not  know. 
He  is  like  an  animal  to  the  gods”  (Bj*.  I.  iv.  10).  Like  animals 
such  a  man  serves  the  gods  even  in  this  world  by  pleasing  them 
with  sacrifices  etc.;  and  in  the  other  world  also  he  serves  the 
gods  like  animals  by  depending  on  them  for  livelihood  and 
enjoying  the  fruits  of  work  as  directed  by  them.  This  is  what 
we  understand. 

The  other  explanation  of  the  second  portion — “on  account  of 
their  non-realization  of  the  Self,  for  the  Upani$ad  shows  the 
same” — (of  the  aphorism)  is  this:  People  “not  having  realized 
the  Self”  are  those  who  are  engaged  in  ritualistic  works  alone, 
that  is  to  say,  those  who  do  not  undertake  rites  and  meditation 
as  a  combined  process.  The  phrase  “realization  of  the  Self”  in 
the  aphorism  is  used  metaphorically  to  mean  “the  meditation  on 
the  five  fires”.  This  is  what  is  gathered  from  the  force  of  the 
context.  Because  of  the  fact  that  they  are  devoid  of  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  five  fires,  the  performers  of  (mere)  sacrifices  are 
here  presented  as  the  food  of  the  gods  in  a  secondary  sense,  so 
as  to  eulogize  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires.  For  what  is  sought 
to  be  enjoined  here  is  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires,  as  can 
be  gathered  from  a  consideration  of  the  purport  of  the  text. 
And  in  line  with  this,  another  text  shows  the  existence  of 
enjoyment  in  the  lunar  world:  “Having  experienced  his  great¬ 
ness  in  the  lunar  world  he  turns  round  again”  (Pj*.  V.  4).  Simi¬ 
larly  there  is  another  text,  “When  the  joy  of  those  manes  who 
have  won  that  world  (of  the  manes)  is  multiplied  a  hundred 
times  it  makes  one  unit  of  joy  in  the  world  of  the  celestial 
minstrels  ( Gandharvas ).  This  joy  in  the  world  of  the  celestial 
minstrels  multiplied  a  hundred  times  makes  one  unit  of  joy  for 
the  gods  by  action,  i.e.  those  who  attain  their  godhood  by  their 


III.  i.  8]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  565 

actions,”  (Bi*.  IV.  iii.  33),  which  shows  that  the  performers  of 
sacrifices  etc.  get  enjoyment  while  staying  with  the  gods.  Thus 
since  the  sentence  about  becoming  food  has  a  secondary  mean¬ 
ing,  it  becomes  comprehensible  that  the  individuals  performing 
sacrifices  etc.  do  go  out  from  the  body.  Hence  it  has  been  said 
quite  appropriately  that  “the  individual  soul  moves  out  envel¬ 
oped  (by  the  subtle  elements)”  (B.  S.  III.  i.  1). 

Topic  2:  Return  of  the  souls 

ll^ll 

After  the  actions  (i.e.  earned  merits)  are  exhausted, 
(the  soul  returns)  in  association  with  (the  residual) 

karma  (results  of  action),  as  is  known  from  the 

Upani$ads  and  Smjrtis,  along  the  path  followed  while 

going  ^  as  also  differently. 

8 .  After  the  actions  are  exhausted ,  the  soul  returns  together 
with  (the  residual )  karma ,  as  is  known  from  the  Upanifads  and 
Smrtis,  along  the  path  followed  (by  it)  while  going  as  also 
differently. 

The  descent  of  those  performers  of  sacrifices  etc.  who  pro¬ 
ceed  along  the  “path  of  smoke”  etc.  to  reach  the  lunar  world 
and  complete  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  their  work,  is 
stated  in  the  text,  starting  with,  “Having  resided  there  ( yavat - 
sampdtam)  till  the  limit  of  karma  is  reached,  they  return  by 
the  very  route  by  which  they  had  gone”  (Ch.  V.  x.  5),  and 
ending  with,  “The  men  of  virtuous  deeds  are  born  among  the 
Brahmaoas  and  others,  while  those  of  vicious  deeds  are  born 
among  the  dogs,  etc.”  (ibid.). 

Doubt :  Here  the  thing  to  be  considered  is  this:  Do  they 
return  after  enjoying  all  the  results  of  action  without  any 
(residtial)  karma ,  or  do  they  come  with  (residual)  karma ?  What 
is  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at  then? 

Opponent:  They  return  without  (residual)  karma.* 

Why? 

Since  the  qualifying  phrase  there  is  “ yavat-sampdtam — up  to 


566  BRAHMA -SOTRA-BHASYA  [III.  i.  8 

the  limit  of  the  totality  of  their  actions”.  By  the  word  sampdta 
is  meant  here  the  total  result  of  actions,  being  derived  in  the 
sense  of  that  by  which  one  ascends  from  this  world  to  the  other 
for  the  sake  of  experiencing  the  result.  And  by  the  text,  “having 
resided  up  to  the  limit  of  the  totality  of  their  actions”,  it  is 
shown  that  the  total  result  of  one’s  karma  is  experienced  there. 
By  another  Upani$adic  text,  “And  when  their  past  work  is 
exhausted,  (they  reach  this  space,  from  space  air,  from  air  rain, 
and  from  rain  the  earth)”  (Bj\  VI.  ii.  16),  this  very  fact  is 
revealed. 

Objection :  It  may  be  like  this:  We  shall  imagine  that  a  man 
enjoys  in  that  world  only  that  much  of  the  result  of  his  actions 
as  is  to  be  enjoyed  there. 

Opponent :  You  cannot  imagine  that  way;  for  elsewhere  the 
mention  is  made  of  “whatever  work”  in  “Exhausting  the  results 
of  whatever  work  he  did  in  this  life,  he  returns  from  that  world 
to  this  for  (fresh)  work”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  6).  Thus  this  other  text 
shows  by  referring  to  “whatever  work”,  without  any  reserva¬ 
tion,  that  all  the  works  done  in  this  world  get  exhausted  in  the 
other  world.  Moreover,  death  is  the  manifester  of  all  works 
that  had  not  yielded  their  results,  (that  is  to  say,  it  makes  them 
ready  to  do  so);  for  before  death  such  works  cannot  yield  their 
results,  they  being  obstructed  by  those  other  works  which  had 
started  their  results  in  the  present  body.  And  (since  there  is 
nothing  to  curb  the  power  of  death)  it  makes  all  the  works 
that  had  not  been  fruitful  (in  this  life)  ready,  without  excep¬ 
tion,  to  yield  their  results  (in  the  next  life).  For  when  a  cause 
is  common  to  all,  it  is  not  logical  that  the  results  should  be 
different.  It  is  not  proper  that  when  the  proximity  of  a  light  is 
the  same,  a  vessel  will  be  illumined  but  not  so  a  cloth.  There¬ 
fore  the  souls  descend  without  any  residual  karma. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say,  that  “After  the 
exhaustion  of  (good)  work  a  soul  returns  along  with  (the 
residual)  karma!\  When  the  results  of  those  works,  for  enjoy¬ 
ing  which  the  soul  had  ascended  to  the  lunar  world,  get 
exhausted  through  enjoyment,  then  the  watery  body  that  had 
been  produced  for  that  soul  for  enjoyment  in  the  lunar  world 
gets  evaporated  by  the  touch  of  the  fire  of  sorrow  enkindled  at 


III.  i.  8] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


567 


the  sight  of  the  exhaustion  of  enjoyment,  like  snow  and  hail 
melting  at  the  touch  of  the  sun’s  rays  or  the  solidity  of  clarified 
butter  being  removed  by  the  touch  of  the  flames  of  (sacrificial) 
fire.  Hence  the  soul  returns  with  (the  residual)  karma  itself 
“after  its  karma  is  exhausted”,  that  is  to  say,  when  such  works 
as  sacrifices  etc.  get  exhausted  through  the  enjoyment  of  their 
results. 

Opponent :  What  is  the  reason  for  that? 

Vedantin :  The  aphorist  says,  “as  is  known  from  the  Upa- 
ni$ads  and  the  Smjtis”.  Thus  there  is  a  direct  Vedic  text  reveal¬ 
ing  the  descent  of  souls  along  with  their  (residual)  karma : 
“Among  them  those  whose  conduct  has  been  good  ( ramanfiya - 
caranah)  will  quickly  attain  some  good  birth,  be  it  among  the 
Brahmagas  or  among  the  K$atriyas  or  among  the  Vaisyas.  Again 
those  whose  conduct  has  been  bad  ( kapuya-carandh )  will 
quickly  attain  bad  birth,  be  it  among  dogs  or  among  swine 
or  among  Chancjalas”  (Ch.  V.  x.  7).  The  aphorist  will  state 
later  that  (residual)  karma  is  indicated  here  by  the  word  cararia 
(lit.  conduct).  And  it  is  a  matter  of  experience  that  enjoyments 
are  graded  as  higher  and  lower  for  each  creature  from  the  very 
birth;  now  since  a  theory  of  chance  is  inadmissible  here,  this 
division  indicates  the  existence  of  (residual)  karma\  for  the 
scriptures  tell  it  in  a  general  way  that  virtue  and  vice  are  the 
causes  of  happiness  and  sorrow.  Smfti  also  shows  that  the  souls 
descend  with  (residual)  karma :  “People  belonging  to  the  dif¬ 
ferent  castes  and  stages  of  life,  who  sincerely  perform  their 
duties,  experience  the  fruits  of  their  works  after  death,  and  then 
through  the  residual  karma  get  births  amidst  special  environ¬ 
ment  and  have  special  caste,  family,  outstanding  beauty,  long 
life,  knowledge,  good  conduct,  wealth,  happiness,  and  intelli¬ 
gence.” 

Opponent :  What  is  this  residual  karma ? 

Some  (pseudo-Vedantin)  says  that  the  residual  karma  is  that 
portion  of  the  results  of  work,  conducive  to  heavenly  life, 
which  is  left  over  after  enjoying  heaven,  like  water  sticking 
to  an  emptied  vessel.  Just  as  an  oil-pot  does  not  become  wholly 
empty  even  when  the  oil  is  poured  out,  since  some  oil  still  sticks 
to  it,  similar  is  the  case  with  residual  karma . 


568  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  i. 8 

Opponent :  It  is  improper  to  say  that  the  result  of  any  work 
persists  even  after  its  enjoyment,  inasmuch  as  the  unseen  potency 
of  work  cannot  co-exist  with  its  product  (viz  happiness  and 
sorrow,  by  producing  which  it  gets  destroyed). 

Pseudo-V edantin :  This  is  no  defect,  for  we  do  not  assert 
that  the  results  of  work  are  wholly  enjoyed  there  (in  the  lunar 
world). 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  fact  that  one  ascends  the  lunar  world 
for  the  full  enjoyment  of  one’s  acquired  merit? 

Pseudo-Vedantin  :  True,  and  yet  one  cannot  continue  there 
when  only  a  little  bit  of  one’s  merit  remains.  Just  as  somebody 
wanting  to  serve  a  king  may  reside  in  his  court  with  all  the 
articles  necessary  .for  the  king’s  pleasure;  but  owing  to  his  long 
sojourn  there,  he  may  run  through  most  of  his  possessions,  being 
ultimately  left  with  only  his  umbrella,  sandals,  etc.,  and  then  he 
cannot  live  in  the  king’s  court  any  longer;  similarly  a  soul  that 
is  left  with  its  residual  karma  alone  cannot  continue  in  the  lunar 
world. 

V edantin  :  This  view  does  not  appear  to  be  correct;  for  it  is 
illogical  to  say  that  any  portion  of  the  result  of  work  conducive 
to  heaven  should  persist  after  enjoyment.  It  has  been  pointed  out 
that  the  unseen  potency  of  work  cannot  outlive  its  result. 

Pseudo-Vedantin :  Did  we  not  also  say  that  the  results  of 
work  conducive  to  heaven  are  not  wholly  enjoyed  there? 

V edantin  :  This  is  unsound;  for  people  who  follow  the  author¬ 
ity  of  the  Vedas  cannot  lend  any  credence  to  such  a  fancy 
that  the  merit  leading  a  man  to  heaven  does  not  bestow  on  him 
all  the  acquired  heavenly  results  even  after  he  has  reached 
heaven,  but  that  a  modicum  of  those  results  fructify  for  him 
even  after  his  fall  from  heaven.  As  for  the  residual  oil  sticking 
to  an  oil-pot,  that  is  quite  logical,  since  it  is  a  matter  of  experi¬ 
ence.  Similarly  too  the  king’s  councillor  is  seen  to  be  left  with 
only  a  few  materials.  But  in  the  case  under  discussion  we  can 
neither  find  any  remnant  of  the  merit  that  had  been  conducive 
to  heaven,  nor  conceive  such  a  thing,  for  that  would  contradict 
the  scriptures  declaring  that  such  a  merit  is  conducive  to  heaven. 
And  this  is  to  be  known  as  a  certainty  that  unlike  oil  sticking 
to  a  vessel,  residual  karma  does  not  mean  the  survival  of  some 


III.  i.  8]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  569 

remnant  of  the  heavenly  result  acquired  from  such  acts  as 
sacrifice  etc.  If,  however,  residual  karma  means  a  part  of  that 
very  result  of  the  meritorious  works  like  sacrifice  etc.,  owing 
to  which  the  souls  have  already  enjoyed  heaven,  then  a  residue 
of  a  good  type  alone  must  be  the  residual  karma ,  and  not  its 
opposite;  but  in  that  case  the  Upani§adic  text  making  the  division 
(of  residual  karma)  by  saying,  “Among  them  those  whose 
conduct  here  is  good”,  “and  then  those  whose  conduct  here  is 
bad”  (Ch.  V.  x.  7),  will  be  contradicted.  Therefore  by  residual 
karmas  are  meant  those  other  results  of  actions  which  are  cal¬ 
culated  to  produce  effects  in  this  world  and  which  still  stand 
over  after  experiencing  the  results  that  were  to  fructify  there 
(in  heaven);  with  these  former  the  souls  descend. 

As  for  the  argument  that  from  the  mention  of  “whatever 
work”  etc.  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  6),  without  any  qualification,  it  follows 
that,  through  the  enjoyment  of  the  results,  the  souls  in  heaven 
exhaust  all  the  (results  of)  works  done  on  this  earth,  and  then 
descend  without  any  residual  karma,  our  reply  is  that  it  is  not 
so;  for  it  has  been  established  (by  us)  that  residual  karma 
persists.  It  is  understood  that  they  return  here  after  exhausting 
through  experience  “whatever  work”  they  had  done  here  with 
a  view  to  getting  the  results  in  heaven,  and  after  those  works 
had  fructified  there.  The  other  argument  was  that  death  induces 
all  works  without  exception,  that  had  not  fructified  here,  to 
become  ready  for  yielding  results,  and  that  it  is  not  possible  to 
make  any  such  division  among  those  works  as  to  show  that 
some  of  them  produce  results  in  heaven  whereas  others  do  so 
on  this  earth.  This  point  of  view  is  refuted  by  us  by  the  very 
fact  of  proving  the  existence  of  residual  karma.  Moreover,  the 
reason  for  asserting  that  death  induces  all  unfulfilled  results  of 
works  to  become  ready  to  yield  fruits  has  to  be  clarified  (by 
the  opponent).  Should  it  be  argued  that  the  unfulfilled  results 
of  works  remain  without  any  function,  they  being  hindered  by 
the  results  of  works  that  have  become  effective  in  this  life,  so 
that  at  the  time  of  death,  when  the  active  results  of  this  life 
cease,  the  dormant  ones  start  functioning,  then  we  reply  thus: 
In  that  case  the  reasonable  position  is  that  if  the  dormant  karma 
cannot  function  before  death,  it  being  obstructed  by  the  active 


570  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  i.  8 

karma ,  then  since  on  the  same  ground  the  conflicting  results  of 
diverse  works  cannot  fructify  simultaneously  at  the  time  of 
death,  the  weaker  karma  cannot  reasonably  become  active  then, 
it  being  obstructed  by  the  stronger  one.  It  cannot  be  said  that 
though  the  results  of  actions  be  many  and  have  to  be  enjoyed 
in  different  births,  still,  owing  to  the  fact  that  they  constitute  a 
single  class  from  the  comprehensive  view  that  all  of  them  are 
dormant,  they  become  simultaneously  ready  for  producing 
results  on  the  eve  of  a  single  death,  and  thus  they  bring  about  a 
single  birth.  For  such  an  assertion  goes  against  the  ordination  of 
particular  results  for  particular  works.  It  cannot  also  be  argued 
that  some  one  (strong)  karma  becomes  activated  at  the  time  of 
death,  while  some  other  (weaker  one)  is  annihilated;  for  that 
contradicts  the  view  that  causes  must  have  their  results  inevitably. 
It  is  not  possible  for  any  karma  to  be  eradicated  except  through 
such  causes  as  expiation  etc.  Smfti  also  shows  that  a  karma  can 
remain  dormant  for  a  long  time  when  it  is  obstructed  by  some 
other  karma  having  a  contrary  result;  for  instance  there  are 
texts  of  the  following  class:  “Sometimes  it  so  happens  that  for 
a  man  sunk  in  this  world,  a  virtuous  work  remains  dormant  here 
till  he  becomes  free  from  sorrow  (through  suffering).”  If,  again, 
all  the  latent  karmas  become  activated  at  a  single  death  and  thus 
lead  to  a  single  birth,  then  since  the  scriptures  do  not  proclaim 
any  competence  for  acquiring  fresh  karma  in  heaven  or  hell  or 
among  lower  creatures,  therefore  there  will  be  no  emergence  of 
fresh  merit  and  demerit.  Hence  in  the  absence  of  any  cause,  no 
other  birth  after  that  can  be  possible,  so  that  the  declaration  in 
the  Smfti  that  each  of  the  sins  like  the  killing  of  a  Brahmaija 
causes  many  births,  will  be  set  at  naught.  And  no  source  other 
than  the  scriptures  can  be  fancied  to  impart  knowledge  about 
the  nature,  result,  cause,  etc.  of  merit  and  demerit.  Moreover, 
death  cannot  possibly  induce  such  rites  as  Karin  (meant  for 
rainfall)  to  yield  their  own  results  which  are  directly  perceptible 
here  (and  are  not  to  be  achieved  elsewhere  through  the  medium 
of  unseen  potency).  Thus  this  imagination  about  death  activizing 
all  karmas  is  out  of  place  in  those  cases.  The  illustration  of  the 
lamp  also  stands  nullified  by  the  very  fact  that  the  results  of 


III.i.9] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


571 


actions  have  been  shown  to  be  either  strong  or  weak.7  Moreover, 
(even  if  death  be  a  revealer),  the  analogy  of  the  lamp  is  to  be 
understood  from  the  point  of  view  of  its  revelation  or  non¬ 
revelation  of  gross  and  subtle  things.  Just  as  a  lamp  reveals  a 
gross  thing  but  not  a  subtle  one,  though  they  be  equally  at 
hand,  similarly  death  induces  the  functioning  of  the  stronger 
karma  alone  but  not  of  the  weaker,  though  all  the  dormant 
works  get  an  equal  opportunity  then  for  their  expression.  There¬ 
fore  this  theory  about  the  inducement  of  all  karmas  to  activity 
by  death  is  improper,  since  it  offends  against  the  Vedas,  Smptis, 
and  logic.  And  the  flurry  about  liberation  becoming  impossible 
if  residual  karma  lasts  is  groundless,  since  the  Upani$ads  mention 
that  all  results  of  actions  are  eradicated  on  the  dawn  of  enlight¬ 
enment.  Hence  the  conclusion  remains  intact  that  the  souls 
descend  with  their  residual  karmas.  And  when  they  come  down, 
they  do  so  along  the  path  followed  (by  them)  while  going  up, 
as  also  differently.  Yathetam  (lit.  as  it  had  been  reached) 
means — “just  as  they  had  gone”;  and  anevam  means  “in  the 
opposite  manner”.  Because  smoke  and  space,  included  in  the 
path  of  the  manes,  are  mentioned  at  the  time  of  descent,  and 
because  the  phrase  “as  it  had  been  reached”  is  used,  it  follows 
that  yathetam  means  “as  they  had  gone  up  by”.  Again,  from 
the  omission  of  night  etc.  and  the  addition  of  cloud  etc.  it 
follows  that  the  course  (of  return)  may  be  different  as  well. 

Gilford  Sfcfasmwfd  uen 

Owing  to  the  use  of  the  word  “conduct”  ^  if 
it  be  objected  thus,  not  so  (the  passage  is)  used 

suggestively  this  is  (how)  spirsurffarpT :  Karsnajini  (thinks). 

9.  If  it  be  contended  that  (the  soul  gets  its  rebirth)  owing  to 
conduct  (and  not  residual  karma),  then  according  to  Karsnajini, 
it  is  not  so,  that  (Upanisadic  passage)  being  used  suggestively 
(for  residual  karma). 

7  Unlike  a  lamp  revealing  colour,  death  reveals  nothing;  but  in  the 
absence  of  a  stronger  result,  a  weaker  result  becomes  predominant  at  the 
time  of  death. 


572  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  i.  9 

Opponent:  Now,  again,  we  see  that  the  Upani$adic  text 
quoted  by  you  for  proving  the  existence  of  residual  karma,  viz 
“Among  them  those  who  have  good  conduct  ( ramaniya-carandh ) 
here”  (Ch.  V.  x.  7),  only  shows  that  rebirth  occurs  on  account 
of  carana  (conduct),  but  it  does  not  show  it  as  occurring  on 
account  of  residual  karma .  Conduct  is  a  different  thing,  and 
different  also  is  residual  karma .  Conduct  {carana),  character 
(caritra),  good  behaviour  ( acdra ).  good  form  {silo) — are  all 
synonymous  terms,  whereas  by  residual  karma  is  meant  that 
karma  which  survives  those  others  whose  fruits  have  been 
experienced.  And  the  Upani$ads  also  show  how  action  and 
conduct  differ,  as  in,  “As  he  acts  and  as  he  behaves,  so  he 
becomes”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  5),  as  also,  “The  works  that  are  not 
blameworthy  are  to  be  resorted  to,  but  not  the  others.  Those 
behaviours  of  ours  which  are  commendable  are  to  be  fol¬ 
lowed  by  you,  but  not  the  others”  (Tai.  I.  xi.  2).  Therefore 
it  follows  that  since  rebirth  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad  as 
occurring  from  conduct,  the  theory,  of  residual  karma  is  not 
proved. 

Kdrsndjini :  This  is  no  defect,  since  the  teacher  Kar$ijajini 
thinks  that  this  Upani$adic  passage  about  conduct  is  used  sug¬ 
gestively  for  residual  karma . 

3TRWrf*Tfa  ll*o|| 

arTTpryiH  (Conduct)  will  cease  to  have  any  usefulness  ^ 
if  it  be  objected  thus,  q*  not  so,  because  action 

{karma)  is  dependent  on  that  conduct. 

10.  If  it  be  objected  that  (in  that  case)  conduct  will  cease  to 
have  any  usefulness ,  then  it  is  not  so,  because  kanna  is  dependent 
on  that  conduct . 

Opponent :  It  may  be  so.  But  why  again  should  Vedic  con¬ 
duct  be  rejected  as  the  meaning  of  the  word  carana  (conduct), 
and  it  should  be  made  to  convey  the  figurative  meaning  of 
residual  work?  The  Vedic  conduct  itself,  resulting  from  both 
injunction  and  prohibition,  and  expressing  itself  as  virtue  and 
vice,  can  have,  as  its  effect,  birth  among  good  and  bad  crea- 


m.i.ii] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


573 


tures.  Moreover,  one  has  perforce  to  admit  some  result  for 
conduct,  for  else  conduct  will  become  useless. 

Karfnajini :  That  is  no  defect. 

Why? 

“Because  action  is  dependent  on  conduct”;  for  rites  such  as 
sacrifices  are  dependent  on  good  conduct,  since  one  devoid  of 
good  conduct  cannot  have  the  requisite  qualification  for  them, 
as  is  said  in  Smfti  texts  like,  “The  Vedas  do  not  purify  one  who 
is  devoid  of  good  conduct”.  And  even  if  conduct  be  meant  for 
personal  purification,  still  it  is  not  useless.  For  when  rites  like 
sacrifices  start  yielding  their  results,  right  conduct,  though 
centring  round  a  person,  may  still  produce  some  excellence  in 
the  results  of  those  very  rites.  The  well-recognized  fact  in  the 
Vedas  and  Smjtis  is  that  it  is  action  that  produces  everything. 
Hence  it  is  the  view  of  Karfnajini  that  actions  themselves  that 
are  implied  indirectly  by  the  word  conduct,  and  are  reduced  to 
residual  karma ,  become  the  cause  of  rebirth.  For  when  rebirth 
can  be  deduced  from  actions,  it  is  illogical  to  father  it  on  con¬ 
duct.  When  one  can  save  oneself  by  running  on  foot,  one 
should  not  move  on  one’s  knees. 

%  srrcft:  \\\\\\ 

g  But  good  and  evil  works  tr^  certainly  this 

is  how  Badari  (thinks). 

11.  But  (the  teacher)  Badari  thinks  that  good  and  bad  'works 
themselves  are  meant  (by  the  word  corona). 

Veddntin :  The  teacher  Badari  opines  that  actions,  good  and 
evil,  are  themselves  meant  (directly  and  not  figuratively)  by 
the  word  corona.  Corona ,  performance,  action — these  are  synon¬ 
ymous  words.  It  is  seen  thus  that  the  root  car  (to  act)  is  used 
with  regard  to  all  actions  in  general.  For  when  a  man  performs 
a  virtuous  deed  like  sacrifice  etc.,  ordinary  people  say,  “This 
great-souled  man  is  acting  (carati)  religiously”.  Conduct  ( dcdra ) 
too  is  a  form  of  religious  action  (or  observance).  As  for  the 
reference  to  the  difference  between  virtuous  acts  and  (good) 


574 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[III.  i.  11 


conduct,  it  can  be  reconciled  on  the  analogy  of  the  Brahmaija 
and  the  mendicant  (i.e.  a  Brahmatta  who  has  chosen  the  monastic 
life).  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  rcnnaniya-cararidh  (men  of 
good  conduct)  are  those  who  perform  the  laudable  acts,  and 
kapuya-caranah  (men  of  bad  conduct)  are  those  who  perform 
the  condemned  acts. 

Topic  3:  Fate  of  evil-doers 

aifHHlf«ir<u[|nfi  ^  qaq  llftll 

arfq  ^  Even  also  for  the  performers  of 

evil  etc.  it  is  heard  of. 

12.  It  is  known  from  the  Vedic  texts  that  ( the  moon  is  the 
goal)  even  for  the  performers  of  unholy  acts  etc .  as  well. 

Doubt :  It  has  been  said  that  the  performers  of  holy  works 
(like  sacrifices)  etc.  go  to  the  lunar  world.  But  now  it  is  being 
considered  whether  those  who  perform  unholy  works  etc.  also 
go  there  or  not. 

With  regard  to  this  the  opponent  says  that  it  is  not  a  fact 
that  the  performers  of  holy  acts  etc.  alone  go  to  the  lunar 
world. 

Whence  is  it  so? 

Opponent :  Since  the  lunar  world  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani- 
?ads  as  a  goal  for  the  performers  of  unholy  acts  as  well.  Thus 
the  followers  of  the  Kau$ItakI  recension  read:  “All  those  who 
depart  from  this  world,  reach  the  moon  to  be  sure”  (Kau.  I.  2). 
And  the  acquisition  of  a  fresh  body,  by  those  who  are  reborn, 
cannot  be  conceived  of  without  their  having  reached  the  moon; 
for  the  number  of  oblations  is  fixed  in  the  statement,  “In  the 
fifth  oblation”  etc.  (Ch.  V.  ix.  1).  Therefore  all  will  reach  the 
moon. 

Objection :  It  is  not  proper  that  the  path  for  both  the  doers 
of  holy  and  unholy  acts  etc.  should  be  the  same. 

Opponent :  Not  so,  for  the  others  (of  unholy  acts,  go  there 
but)  have  no  experience. 


III. i.  13]  BRAHMA  - SCTRA  -  BHAJYA  575 

W W <1^  ii^ii 

g  But  in  the  case  of  others  (descent  occurs)  anj^ 

after  having  suffered  ^fqiT%  in  the  abode  of  Death.  (Thus  occur 
their)  3TRtf-3RTt^  ascent  and  descent;  for  their 

course  is  met  with  in  the  Upani$ads. 

13.  ( Veddntin )  :  But  as  for  others  (they  have  their  descent) 
after  suffering  in  the  abode  of  Death;  (thus  occur  their)  ascent 
and  descent ,  for  their  course  is  met  with  in  the  Upanisads. 

The  word  “but”  refutes  the  other  point  of  view,  by  implying 
that  it  is  not  a  fact  that  all  go  to  the  moon. 

How  is  this  known? 

The  ascent  to  the  moon  is  meant  for  experiences  and  not  for 
nothing;  nor  is  it  meant  for  the  sake  of  mere  descent.  For 
instance,  a  man  verily  climbs  a  tree  for  gathering  flowers  and 
fruits,  but  neither  purposelessly  nor  for  merely  dropping  down 
from  it.  And  it  has  been  stated  earlier  that  those  who  do  not 
perform  holy  acts  etc.  have  no  experiences  in  the  moon.  Hence 
only  the  performers  of  holy  acts  ascend  to  the  moon,  not  the 
others.  As  for  the  others,  they  enter  into  the  place  of  Death 
(i.e.  hell)  and  suffer  the  torments  of  hell  in  accordance  with 
their  own  misdeeds,  and  then  ascend  to  this  world.  Thus  occur 
their  ascent  and  descent. 

How  is  this  known? 

Because  “Their  course  is  met  with  in  the  Upanisads”.  Thus 
a  Upani^adic  passage,  under  the  garb  of  a  speech  of  Death 
concerning  the  departed  evil-doers,  shows  how  they  come 
under  the  sway  of  Death:  “The  means  of  the  attainment  of  the 
other  world  does  not  become  revealed  to  the  non-discriminating 
man  who  blunders,  being  befooled  by  the  lure  of  wealth.  One 
that  constantly  thinks  thus,  ‘There  is  only  this  world,  and  none 
hereafter’,  comes  under  my  (Death’s)  sway  again  and  again” 
(Ka.  I.  ii.  6).  There  are  other  suggestive  sentences  indicating 
that  people  come  under  the  sway  of  Death:  “Let  Death,  to 
whom  men  have  to  go,  be  propitiated  with  oblations”  (R.  V. 
X.  xiv.  1). 


*76 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[Ill.i.  14 


14.  And  they  mention  this  in  the  Smrtis. 

Moreover,  such  respected  teachers  as  Manu,  Vyasa,  and 
others  mention  in  the  Smrtis,  in  connection  with  such  stories 
as  that  of  Naciketas,  that  the  results  of  evil  deeds  is  suffered  in 
the  abode  of  Death  under  Death’s  command. 


3rfa  ^  II \V\ 

IS.  And  (they  are  mentioned  as)  seven  (hells  in  the  Pur  anas). 

Moreover,  seven  hells,  counting  from  Raurava  are  described 
by  the  followers  of  the  Puranas,  as  the  fields  for  reaping  the 
results  of  bad  deeds.  There  the  doers  of  unholy  acts  etc.  are 
cast.  How  can  they  then  reach  the  moon?  This  is  the  idea. 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  a  contradiction  to  assert  that  the  sinners 
suffer  the  pains  inflicted  by  Death,  since  the  Smrtis  mention 
many  others  like  Citragupta,  who  preside  over  those  Raurava 
and  other  hells? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is  being  given  in  the  negative: 


srfir  Even  there  ^  also  on  account  of  his 

(Death’s)  control  arfsTTfa:  there  is  no  contradiction. 

16,  Since  Death’s  control  extends  even  there ,  no  contradiction 
can  arise . 


No  contradiction  is  involved  since  it  is  admitted  that  even 
in  those  seven  hells,  Death  exercises  control  as  the  chief  digni¬ 
tary;  for  the  Smrtis  mention  that  Citragupta  and  others  are 
officers  appointed  by  Death. 


<3  SffTdc^iq;  ll?V9ll 


^  But  f^rr-^nprt:  of  knowledge  (meditation)  and  action 
this  is  (what  is  meant  by  the  expression  “of  these  two  paths”) 
that  being  the  topic  under  discussion. 


III.  i.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  577 

11.  But  (by  the  expression  66 of  these  two  paths”)  what  is 
meant  is  “of  knowledge  (i.e.  meditation)  and  action ”,  for  that 
is  the  topic  under  discussion . 

Under  the  topic  of  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires,  in  the 
course  of  the  answer  to  the  question,  “Do  you  know  how  the 
other  world  does  not  get  filled  up?”  it  is  stated  in  the  Upani$ad, 
“Then  there  are  those  who  go  by  neither  of  these  two  paths  (of 
the  gods  and  the  manes)  and  who  become  those  tiny,  contin¬ 
ually  transmigrating  creatures  under  the  divine  command,  ‘Be 
born  and  die’.  This  is  the  third  state.  That  is  why  that  other 
world  (heaven)  does  not  get  filled  up”  (Ch.  V.  x.  8).  In  this 
text,  the  expression  “these  two  paths”  stands  for  “the  paths  of 
knowledge  (i.e.  meditation)  and  work”. 

Why  so?  ' 

For  that  is  the  topic  under  discussion.  For  knowledge  and 
action  are  discussed  here  as  the  means  for  the  attainment  of  the 
paths  of  the  gods  and  the  manes.  Knowledge  is  mentioned  in 
“Among  these,  those  who  know  (meditate)  thus”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1), 
and  it  is  declared  that  through  that  meditation  is  attained  the 
path  of  the  gods.  Work  is  mentioned  in,  “sacrifices,  philanthrop¬ 
ic  works,  charity  ( daksind )”  (Ch.  V.  x.  3),  and  it  is  declared 
that  through  that  is  attained  the  path  of  the  manes.  It  is  in  con¬ 
nection  with  these  that  the  Upanisad  says,  “Then  there  are  those 
who  go  by  neither  of  these  two  paths.”  The  idea  conveyed  is 
this:  For  those  is  meant  this  ever  rotating  third  path  consisting 
in  becoming  tiny  creatures,  who  are  neither  qualified  for  the 
path  of  the  gods  through  the  practice  of  meditation  nor  for  the 
path  of  the  manes  through  the  performance  of  rites  etc.  From 
this  also  follows  that  those  who  do  not  perform  holy  deeds  etc. 
do  not  reach  the  moon. 

Opponent :  It  may  be  that  they  too  ascend  to  the  moon  and 
then  descend  from  there  to  become  the  tiny  creatures. 

Vedantin  :  That  also  is  not  possible,  since  the  ascent  itself  is 
useless.  Moreover,  if  all  who  depart,  reach  the  moon,  the  other 
world  would  get  filled  up  by  the  departing  creatures;  and 
hence  the  answer  would  run  counter  to  the  question  (viz  “Why 
does  not  the  other  world  get  filled  up?”).  The  answer  is  to  be 
37 


578  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  i.  17 

given  in  a  way  that  can  show  how  the  other  world  does  not  get 
filled  up. 

Opponent :  From  the  admission  of  descent  it  becomes  possible 
for  the  other  world  not  to  become  filled  up. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  such  a  thing  is  not  mentioned  by  the 
Upani$ad.  It  is  true  that  the  world  may  not  get  filled  up  because 
of  the  fact  of  descent  as  well;  but  the  Upani$ad  explains  the 
fact  of  not  being  filled  up  by  describing  the  third  state  thus: 
“This  is  the  third  state.  That  is  why  the  other  world  does  not 
get  filled  up”  (Ch.  V.  x.  8).  From  that  it  follows  that  the  non¬ 
filling  is  caused  by  the  absence  of  ascent  in  their  case.  For  other¬ 
wise  the  descent  being  the  common  lot  of  the  performers  of 
holy  deeds  etc.  as  well,  the  mention  of  the  third  state  would  be 
useless.  The  word  “but”  is  used  for  uprooting  the  misconception 
generated  by  the  text  of  another  branch  that  all  the  souls  go  to 
the  moon.  This  being  the  case,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the 
word  “all”  used  (in  “all  who  depart”)  in  the  other  branch  (i.e. 
Kau$ItakI,  I.  2),  is  meant  to  imply  “all  who  have  the  qualifica¬ 
tion  (to  ascend)”;  the  idea  being  that  all  those  who  depart  from 
this  world  with  the  requisite  qualification  certainly  reach  the 
moon. 

And  the  objection  was  raised  that  all  should  go  to  the  moon, 
so  that  their  acquisition  of  fresh  bodies  may  be  possible  in 
accordance  with  the  number  of  oblations  fixed  in  the  statement, 
“in  the  fifth  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  ix.  1);  that  is  being  answered: 

*  qtffo  l|*q| 

Not  (applicable)  in  the  case  of  the  third  state; 

(this)  being  noticeable  thus. 

18.  (The  specification  about  the  number  of  oblations)  is  not 
applicable  in  the  case  of  the  third  state ,  this  being  noticeable  (in 
the  Upanisad). 

Not  milch  importance  is  to  be  attached  to  the  fixity  of  the 
number  of  the  oblations  as  five,  so  far  as  the  acquisition  of  a 
body  in  the  third  state  is  concerned. 

Why? 


III.  i.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  579 

“This  being  (the  position)  noticeable  (in  the  Upani§ad)’\ 
For  it  is  found  in  the  Upani$ad  that  the  third  course  is  attained 
in  accordance  with  the  process  stated  and  irrespective  of  the 
specification  about  the  number  of  oblations:  “under  the  divine 
command,  ‘Be  born  and  die’.  This  is  the  third  state”  (Ch.  V.  x.  8). 
Besides,  in  the  text,  “The  water  comes  to  be  known  as  man  in 
the  fifth  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  ix.  1),  the  number  of  oblations  is 
declared  as  a  cause  for  the  acquisition  of  a  human  body,  but 
not  as  the  cause  for  the  bodies  of  insects,  moth,  etc.,  for  the 
word  man  ( puru$a )  stands  for  humanity  as  a  class.  Moreover, 
the  instruction  is  about  water  becoming  known  as  man  in  the 
fifth  oblation;  but  it  is  not  meant  to  overrule  its  becoming  so  in 
any  oblation  other  than  the  fifth;  for  that  would  lead  to  a 
duality  of  meaning  (equivocation)  for  the  same  sentence.  That 
being  the  position,  those  who  have  the  possibility  of  ascent  and 
descent  alone  will  get  their  bodies  during  the  fifth  oblation;  for 
others,  their  bodies  will  be  created  by  water,  in  association  with 
the  other  elements,  irrespective  of  the  number  of  oblations. 

mfofq  ^  ii  ttu 

arfq  Moreover,  the  Smrtis  record,  in  the  Maha- 
bharata  etc.  ^  well;  (and  there  is  popular  belief). 

19.  Moreover ,  there  are  records  in  the  Smrtis  (of  birth 
without  parentage)  as  also  in  the  Mahabharata  etc.;  and  there  is 
popular  belief  as  well. 

Moreover,  the  Smrtis  record  how  in  this  world  Drooa, 
Dhj-$tadyumna,  and  others,  and  Slta,  DraupadI,  and  others 
were  born  without  parentage.  Of  them  Droija  and  others  lacked 
the  oblation  in  the  mother’s  womb,  while  Dhf&adyumna  and 
others  lacked  the  oblations  in  both  man  and  woman.  Just  as  in 
those  cases  the  number  of  oblations  is  ignored,  so  also  it  can  be 
in  other  cases.  And  it  is  a  popular  belief  that  female  cranes 
conceive  without  contact  with  the  males. 

S5RT5I  IRo|| 

20.  Moreover ,  it  is  seen  (that  creatures  are  born  without  the 
five  oblations). 


580  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [in.  i.  20 

Moreover,  it  being  noticed  that  among  the  four  kinds  of  life — 
viviparous,  oviparous,  life  springing  from  moisture,  and  plant  life 
— the  latter  two  classes  are  born  without  any  mating.  And  hence 
the  number  of  oblations  is  overlooked.  This  can  be  the  case  for 
others  as  well. 

Opponent :  Those  creatures  have  only  three  sources  of  life; 
for  in  the  passage,  “oviparous,  viviparous,  and  plant  life”  (Ch.  VI. 
iii.  1),  only  three  classes  of  creatures  are  shown.  So  how  is  it 
asserted  that  the  creatures  are  grouped  into  four  classes? 

Veddntin :  In  answer  it  is  said: 

sfoitafcKH  WWW 

The  third  term  is  inclusive  of  the 

one  born  from  moisture. 

21.  Life  springing  from  moisture  is  included  in  the  third  term 
(plant  life). 

It  is  to  be  understood  that  in  the  text  “oviparous,  viviparous, 
and  plant  life”,  life  springing  from  moisture  is  included  in  the 
third  term  plant  life,  for  both  plant  life,  and  life  springing  from 
moisture  have  the  common  feature  of  coming  out  by  pushing 
their  way  through  earth  or  liquids.  But  since  germination  from 
motionless  life  is  distinct  from  germination  from  motile  life,  a 
difference  is  drawn  elsewhere  between  the  plants  and  creatures 
bom  out  of  moisture.  Hence  there  is  no  contradiction. 

Topic  4:  Similarity  with  Space  etc.  During  Descent 


^TnTToir-srrTfrl:  Attainment  of  similarity  3qq-^f:  that  being  reason¬ 
able. 

22.  (The  descending  soul)  attains  similarity  ('with  space ,  air, 
etc.);  for  that  is  reasonable. 

It  has  been  said  that  the  performers  of  holy  works  etc.,  reach 
the  moon  and  stay  there  till  the  residual  karma  is  reached;  then 


III.  i.  22  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  581 

they  descend  with  their  residual  karma  (III.  i.  8).  Now  is  being 
examined  the  process  of  descent.  As  to  that,  here  is  an  Upa- 
ni$adic  text  speaking  of  the  descent:  “Then  they  resort  to  this 
very  path  again,  just  as  they  had  come.  They  reach  space,  from 
space  air;  having  become  air,  the  sacrificer  becomes  smoke; 
having  become  smoke,  he  becomes  vapour;  having  become 
vapour,  he  becomes  cloud;  having  become  cloud,  he  pours  down 
(as  rain)”  (Ch.  V.  x.  5). 

Doubt :  Here  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  descending 
souls  become  identified  in  nature  with  space  etc.,  or  they 
become  similar  to  them. 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  that  can  be  arrived  at  here  is  that 
they  become  identified  with  space  etc. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

Opponent :  For  such  is  the  Upani$adic  text;  for  else  we  shall 
have  to  interpret  the  text  figuratively.  When  a  doubt  arises 
about  the  literal  and  figurative  senses,  the  literal  one  is  to  be 
accepted,  and  not  the  figurative.  That  being  so,  the  texts 
“becoming  air,  he  becomes  vapour”  etc.  are  to  be  taken  in  the 
sense  of  attaining  identity  with  those  things.  Hence  the  con¬ 
clusion  is  that  the  soul  becomes  transformed  into  space  etc.  in 
the  literal  sense. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say  that  they  attain 
a  state  of  similarity  with  space  etc.  As  the  liquid  body,  formed 
in  the  lunar  world  for  the  sake  of  enjoyment,  starts  to  melt 
away  after  the  exhaustion  of  enjoyment,  it  becomes  fine 
(and  light)  like  space.  Then  it  comes  under  the  influence  of 
air.  Then  it  comes  in  contact  with  smoke  etc.  This  fact  is 
stated  in,  “Just  as  he  had  come.  He  reaches  space,  from  space 
air”  (Ch.  V.  x.  5)  etc. 

How  do  you  know  this? 

“Because  that  is  reasonable.”  For  it  is  not  logical  that  some¬ 
thing  should  be  transformed  into  something  else  in  the  primary 
sense.  If  it  were  to  become  space  itself,  its  descent  through  air 
etc.  in  succession  would  not  be  actualized.  Moreover,  the  soul 
as  well  as  space  being  omnipresent,  it  has  a  constant  relationship 
with  space;  and  hence  there  can  be  no  other  relationship  (e.g. 
conjunction)  of  the  soul  with  space  than  the  assumption  of  a 


582  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  i.  22 

form  similar  to  it.8  And  when  the  literal  sense  of  a  text  is 
inadmissible,  it  is  but  logical  to  resort  to  a  figurative  sense.  Hence 
in  this  context  the  attainment  of  a  state  of  similarity  with  space 
etc.  is  meant  figuratively  here  by  “becoming  space”  etc. 

Topic  5:  Intervening  Period  of  Descent 

Hlfdf^T  \\^\\\ 

(The  descent  takes  place)  ?r  not  3rRr-f^JT  after  a  long  time 
fawq  on  the  authority  of  a  special  statement. 

23.  (The  descent  of  the  soul  from  one  state  to  another  takes 
place)  not  after  long  intervals ,  (as  is  known)  on  the  authority 
of  a  specific  statement  (in  the  Upani$ad). 

Doubt :  While  on  this  topic,  a  doubt  arises  with  regard  to 
the  soul’s  becoming  space  etc.  before  becoming  paddy  etc.,  as 
to  whether  it  continues  in  its  similarity  with  the  earlier  stages 
for  long  intervals  before  it  attains  similarity  with  the  succeeding 
stages,  or  it  continues  so  during  small  intervals. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  there  is  no  rule,  since  no  categorical 
scripture  is  in  evidence. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says,  “not 
after  long  intervals”;  the  souls  descend  to  this  earth  with  the 
showers  of  rain  after  staying  in  the  states  of  space  etc.  for  short 
intervals. 

How  is  this  known? 

“On  the  authority  of  a  specific  statement”.  Thus  it  is  that  after 
the  attainment  of  similarity  with  paddy  etc.,  the  Upani§ad  says, 
“It  is  indeed  more  difficult  to  come  out  of  this  state”  (Ch.  V.  x. 
6).  In  the  word  dumisprapataram,  one  ta  is  to  be  understood 

8  No  other  relationship  but  that  of  similarity  is  possible  between  two 
all-pervasive  things — space  and  soul.  Hence  the  Upanisad  speaks  of  two 
entities — soul  and  space.  The  soul  cannot  be  both  soul  and  space  at  the 
same  time,  as  milk  converted  into  curd  cannot  be  both  milk  and  curd 
at  the  same  time.  And  unless  the  soul  and  space  remain  distinct,  the  soul 
cannot  re-emerge  from  space  as  the  soul  to  follow  its  further  course. 
The  same  relationship  of  similarity  holds  good  in  the  case  of  air  etc. 


III.  i.  24]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  583 

as  dropped  as  a  Vedic  licence  (the  word  being  actually  dumi$- 
prapatataram).  The  meaning  is  that  it  becomes  more  difficult  to 
get  out  of  this  state  of  similarity  with  paddy  etc.  Thus  the 
coming  out  ( nifprapatana )  being  shown  to  be  difficult  in  this 
case,  the  idea  implied  is  that  the  coming  out  is  easier  in  the 
earlier  stages.  And  this  difference  of  happiness  and  sorrow  as 
shown  during  the  coming  out  has  reference  to  the  shortness  or 
length  of  the  interval  of  coming  out;  for  the  body  is  not  formed 
during  that  interval,  and  so  no  experience  is  possible.  Hence  the 
soul’s  descent  up  till  the  moment  of  becoming  similar  to  paddy 
etc.  occurs  in  a  short  time  indeed. 

Topic  6:  The  Souls  in  Plants  and  Thereafter 

gftrcfiKUHiq  irvii 

As  in  earlier  stages  (the  soul  stays  in  paddy  etc.) 
inhabited  by  other  souls;  for  so  it  is 

declared. 

24 .  As  in  the  earlier  stages ,  so  also  (in  the  later  stages)  the  soul 
merely  resides  in  paddy  etc .  that  are  already  inhabited  by  other 
souls y  for  so  it  is  declared. 

Doubt :  While  dealing  with  that  very  course  of  descent,  the 
text  mentions  after  the  fall  in  the  form  of  a  shower,  “Those 
descending  souls  are  born  here  (on  the  earth)  as  paddy,  barley, 
shrubs,  trees,  sesamum,  pulses,  etc.”  (Ch.  V.  x.  6).  With  regard 
to  this  the  doubt  arises,  whether  the  souls  when  descending 
with  their  residual  karmas,  enjoy  and  suffer  the  happiness  and 
sorrow  natural  to  the  plants  etc.,  after  reaching  this  stage  and 
becoming  themselves  motionless  plants  etc.,  or  they  merely  come 
into  contact  with  plant  bodies  which  are  possessed  by  other 
souls?  What  is  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  then? 

Opponent :  The  descending  souls,  possessed  of  residual  karmas 
are  born  as  plants  etc.;  and  thus  they  have  experience  of  happi¬ 
ness  and  sorrow  belonging  to  these  species. 

How  do  you  know  this? 

Since  the  verb  “to  be  born”  should  be  accepted  in  the  literal 


584  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  i.  24 

sense.  Besides,  life  as  plants  is  well  recognized  in  the  Vedas  and 
Smrtis  as  a  state  for  the  souls’  experiences.  Moreover,  it  is 
reasonable  that  acts  like  sacrifices  etc.  should  have  evil  results, 
since  they  are  connected  with  animal  sacrifice  etc.  Hence  like 
birth  as  dogs  etc.,  the  descending  souls  having  residual  karma , 
are  born  as  paddy  etc.  in  the  primary  sense,  lust  as  the  descend¬ 
ing  souls  have  “births  among  dogs,  swine,  or  Candelas”  (Ch.  V. 
x.  7)  in  the  primary  sense,  and  in  those  births  they  have  the 
experiences  of  the  respective  happiness  and  sorrow,  so  also  have 
they  births  as  paddy  etc. 

Vedantin :  To  this,  our  reply  is  that,  as  in  the  previous  stages, 
similarly  here  also,  the  souls,  having  residual  karma,  merely  come 
into  contact  with  paddy  etc.  which  are  already  inhabited  by 
other  souls,  but  they  do  not  share  in  their  happiness  and  sorrow. 
As  the  attainment  of  the  states  of  air,  smoke,  etc.  by  the  descend¬ 
ing  souls  consists  in  their  mere  contact  with  these,  so  also  the 
attainment  of  the  states  of  paddy  etc.,  consists  merely  in  a  contact 
with  those  that  are  plants  etc.  from  birth. 

How  is  this  known? 

Because  the  Upani$adic  declaration  here  is  similar  to  the 
earlier. 

Opponent :  What  is  meant  by  the  Upani§adic  declaration 
being  similar  to  the  earlier? 

Vedantin :  Their  similarity  consists  in  the  declaration  being 
made  without  any  reference  to  (this  state  being  attained 
through)  a  fruition  of  karma.  As  in  the  stages  starting  with  space 
and  ending  with  rainfall,  no  mention  of  fruition  of  karma  is 
made,  so  also  is  it  with  regard  to  the  births  among  paddy,  barley, 
etc.  Hence  the  descending  souls  have  no  experience  here  of  hap¬ 
piness  and  sorrow.  But  where  the  intention  is  to  speak  of  the 
experience  of  such  happiness  and  sorrow,  the  fruition  of  karma 
also  is  mentioned  by  such  statements  as,  “the  people  of  good 
conduct,  the  people  of  bad  conduct  etc.”  (Ch.  V.  x.  7).  More¬ 
over,  if  the  birth  of  the  souls,  having  residual  karma,  among 
paddy,  barley  etc.  be  taken  in  the  literal  sense,  then  when  the 
paddy  etc.  are  harvested,  fried,  cooked,  or  eaten,  the  souls 
identifying  themselves  with  these  will  be  thereby  ejected  from 
them.  For  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  a  soul  that  inhabits  any 


III.  i.  25  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  585 

body  leaves  that  body  when  it  is  subjected  to  great  torment.  In 
that  case  the  Upani$ad  would  not  have  mentioned  that  from  the 
state  of  similarity  with  paddy  etc.  the  descending  souls  attain 
similarity  with  male  creatures  possessed  of  progenitive  power. 
Hence  the  souls  that  have  residual  karma  merely  come  into 
contact  with  paddy  etc.  that  are  already  inhabited  by  other 
souls.  As  a  result  of  this,  one  has  to  reject  the  primary  meaning 
of  the  verb  “to  be  born”,  as  also  the  state  of  plant  life  as  a  place 
for  experiencing  happiness  and  sorrow  (by  those  souls).  At  the 
same  time  we  do  not  deny  that  the  plant  life  is  a  state  for  experi¬ 
encing  the  fruits  of  work.  Let  this  be  a  state  of  experience  for 
those  souls  which,  owing  to  their  lack  of  merit,  have  attained 
the  state  of  plant  life.  But  the  souls  descending  from  the  moon 
with  their  residual  karmas  do  not  have  any  experience  in  identi¬ 
fication  with  plant  life.  This  is  our  standpoint. 

arpfafa  %3T  513513  IPftli 

(Sacrifices  etc.  are)  unholy  ^  if  such  be  the 

objection,  ^  not  so,  owing  to  the  sanction  of  scriptures. 

25.  If  it  be  argued  that  rites  (involving  killing  of  animals)  are 
unholy ,  vie  say ,  no,  since  they  are  sanctioned  by  scriptures. 

Opponent :  It  was  argued  that  sacrificial  actions  are  impure 
inasmuch  as  they  are  connected  with  animal-killing  etc.  and 
therefore  their  results  can  be  inferred  to  be  evil,  so  that  the  birth 
of  the  souls,  having  residual  karma ,  as  paddy,  barley,  etc.,  can 
well  be  in  the  literal  sense,  and  it  is  useless  to  imagine  a  figurative 
meaning  there. 

Vedantin :  That  argument  is  being  refuted.  That  is  not  so,  for 
knowledge  of  virtue  and  vice  is  derived  from  the  scriptures.  The 
scriptures  alone  are  the  source  for  knowing  that  such  an  act  is 
virtuous,  and  such  another  is  not  virtuous;  for  merit  and  demerit 
are  supersensuous  realities  and  they  are  not  invariable  for  all 
space,  time,  and  environment.  Any  deed  that  is  performed  as 
virtuous  in  relation  to  certain  place,  time,  and  circumstances, 
becomes  non-virtuous  in  relation  to  other  places,  times,  and  cir¬ 
cumstances,  so  that  nobody  can  have  any  knowledge  about 


586  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [III.  i.  25 

virtue  and  vice,  unless  it  be  from  the  scriptures.  And  from  the 
scriptures  it  is  ascertained  that  the  Jyoti&oma  sacrifice,  involving 
injury,  favour,  etc.,  is  virtuous.  So  how  can  that  be  declared  to 
be  impure? 

Opponent :  By  saying,  “One  should  not  injure  any  of  the 
creatures”,  the  scripture  itself  shows  that  injury  done  to  any 
creature  is  unholy. 

Vedantin :  True;  but  that  is  only  a  general  rule;  and  here  is 
the  exception,  “One  should  immolate  an  animal  for  Agni  and 
Soma”.  Both  the  general  rule  and  the  exception  have  their  well- 
defined  scopes.  Hence  Vedic  rites  are  quite  pure,  since  they  are 
practised  by  the  good  people  and  are  not  condemned  by  them. 
Hence  birth  as  plants  cannot  be  their  corresponding  result.  Nor 
can  birth  as  paddy  etc.  be  on  an  equal  footing  with  birth  as 
dogs  etc.,  for  the  latter  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the 
doers  of  evil;  but  no  specific  liability  (to  be  born  as  such)  is 
met  with  here  (as  regards  plant  life).  Hence  the  mere  association 
with  paddy  etc.  of  the  souls  descending  from  the  moon  with 
their  residual  karmas  is  indirectly  spoken  of  as  becoming  those 
plants. 

u^ii 

3PT  Then  (occurs)  connection  with  an  insemi- 

nator. 

26.  Then  (the  soul)  gets  connected  with  an  inseminator. 

This  is  a  further  reason  why  what  is  meant  by  becoming 
paddy  etc.  is  only  association  with  them.  After  the  statement 
about  becoming  paddy  etc.,  the  scripture  states  that  the  descend¬ 
ing  soul  becomes  a  progenitor,  as  in,  “For  the  soul  becomes  one 
with  whomsoever  eats  food  and  performs  the  act  of  generation” 
(Ch.  V.  x.  6).  But  identity  with  the  progenitor  is  not  possible 
here  in  the  literal  sense,,  for  one  becomes  a  progenitor  long  after 
birth  when  one  attains  adolescence.  So  how  can  the  descending 
soul  that  remains  associated  with  the  food  that  is  eaten  become 
identified  with  the  progenitor  unless  it  be  in  a  secondary  sense? 
In  that  text  then  it  has  perforce  to  be  admitted  that  the  mere 


III.  i.  27] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


587 


connection  with  the  progenitor  is  spoken  of  as  becoming  himself. 
Therefore  what  is  meant  by  becoming  paddy  etc.  is  also  nothing 
but  being  connected  with  them.  Thus  there  is  no  contradiction. 

STCkn  IRvall 

From  the  womb  qpchpj  (comes)  a  body. 

27.  from  the  womb  (comes)  a  new  body  (for  the  descending 
soul). 

Then  after  being  connected  with  a  progenitor  the  soul  with 
its  residual  karma  enters  a  womb  and  gets  a  body  fitted  for  the 
experience  of  its  (residual)  karma.  This  is  what  is  said  in  the 
scripture  in,  “Among  them,  those  who  have  good  conduct  on 
this  earth”  (Ch.  V.  x.  7).  etc.  From  this  too  it  is  known  that 
when  during  the  course  of  a  soul’s  descent,  an  occasion  arises 
for  connection  with  paddy  etc.,  those  very  bodies  do  not  become 
a  source  of  happiness  and  sorrow.  Hence  it  is  concluded  that 
the  mere  contact  with  paddy  etc.  is  spoken  of  as  the  birth  of 
the  souls  descending  with  their  residual  karmas. 


Section  II 


In  the  previous  section,  the  topic  of  the  meditation  on  the  five 
fires  was  raised  and  the  different  courses  of  transmigration  of 
the  individual  souls  were  discussed.  Now  is  being  elaborated  the 
different  states  of  those  very  souls. 

Topic  1:  Dream  State 

^  %  ii tn 

grofr  In  the  intermediate  stage  qrfe  (occurs)  creation,  since 
(the  Upani$ad)  says  (so). 

1.  In  the  intermediate  stage  (of  dream)  occurs  (real)  creation ; 
for  the  Upani$ad  says  so. 

Opening  with  the  passage,  “When  he  dreams”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  9) 
the  scripture  states,  “There  are  no  chariots,  nor  animals  to  be 
yoked  to  them,  nor  roads  there,  but  he  creates  the  chariots, 
animals,  and  roads”  etc.  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  10). 

Doubt :  The  doubt  arises  with  regard  to  this,  whether  the 
creation  in  dream  is  as  real  as  in  the  waking  state,  or  it  is  only 
illusory. 

Opponent :  While  on  this  topic,  it  is  gathered  that  the  crea¬ 
tion  in  the  intermediate  stage  (lit.  occurring  at  the  junction)  is 
real.  By  the  term  “Intermediate  stage”  is  meant  dream,  for  such 
a  use  is  met  with  in  the  Vedas,  as  in,  “The  dream  state  which  is 
the  third  is  at  the  junction  of  the  two  (waking  and  deep  sleep)” 
(Bf.  IV.  iii.  9).  It  occurs  at  the  juncture  of  the  two  worlds — 
(the  other  and  this)1,  or  between  the  two  states  of  waking  and 
deep  sleep;  therefore  it  is  called  the  sandhya  (intervening  stage). 

lWhen  the  senses  are  withdrawn  at  the  time  of  death,  the  dying  man 
has  no  sense-perception;  yet  at  that  time  he  remembers  this  world  as  a 
sort  of  mental  impression,  and  in  that  mind  flashes  a  picture  of  the  next 
world  which  is  expected  as  a  result  of  his  actions.  This  is  the  juncture. 


in.  ii.  2]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  589 

The  creation  that  occurs  in  that  intervening  period  must  neces¬ 
sarily  be  real. 

Why? 

Since  the  Upani$ad,  which  is  authoritative,  says  thus:  “but  he 
creates  the  chariots,  animals,  and  roads”  (Bj%  IV.  iii.  10).  etc. 
And  from  the  conclusion,  “For  he  is  the  agent”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  10), 
this  becomes  confirmed. 


farafarc  iru 

And  some  (consider  the  soul)  PnrfcTR^  as  the  creator; 
tT  and  cpriW:  sons  and  others  (are  the  objects  desired). 

2.  And  some  (following  a  particular  branch)  consider  the  Self 
to  be  a  creator  (of  things  desired);  and  sons  and  others  (are  the 
objects  desired ). 

Moreover,  the  followers  of  one  branch  of  the  Vedas  mention 
the  Self  as  the  creator  of  desires  (i.e.  desirable  things)  in  this 
very  intervening  stage:  “Puru$a  (the  all-pervading  conscious 
entity),  who  keeps  awake  and  goes  on  creating  desires  even  when 
the  senses  fall  asleep,  is  pure”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  8).  And  sons  etc.  are 
the  “desires”  mentioned  in  the  text,  the  word  being  derived  in 
the  sense  of  “things  wished  for  or  desired”. 

Objection  :  By  the  word  kama  should  be  denoted  different 
kinds  of  desire. 

Opponent :  No,  for  the  subject  is  broached  thus:  “Ask  for 
sons  and  grandsons  who  will  be  centenarians”  (Ka.  I.  i.  23),  and 
the  conclusion  is  made  with,  “I  make  you  fit  for  the  enjoyment 
of  all  kamas  (delectable  things)”  (ibid.  24),  where  the  word 
kdma  is  used  in  the  relevant  places  for  sons  etc.  who  are  under 
consideration.  From  the  subject-matter  of  the  chapter  and  the 
complementary  portion  also  we  understand  that  the  supreme 
conscious  Self  is  the  creator.  For  the  subject-matter  of  the  topic 
is  the  supreme  Self,  as  stated  in  the  beginning,  “Tell  me  of  that 
thing  which  you  see  as  different  from  virtue,  different  from 
vice”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14);  and  the  complementary  passage  also  relates 
to  It,  “He  is  pure,  He  is  Brahman,  and  He  is  called  the  immortal. 
All  the  worlds  are  fixed  on  Him;  none  can  transcend  Him”  (Ka. 


590 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.  ii.  2 


II.  ii.  8).  It  is  also  known  that  the  creation  by  the  supreme  Self 
within  the  range  of  wakefulness  is  real;  so  equally  real  must  be  the 
creation  in  the  domain  of  dream.  In  support  of  this  occurs  the 
Upani$adic  text,  “Others,  however,  say  that  the  dream  state  of 
a  man  is  nothing  but  the  waking  state,  because  he  sees  in  dreams 
only  those  things  that  he  sees  in  the  waking  state”  (Bf.  IV.  iii. 
14),  which  shows  the  applicability  of  the  same  logic  to  the 
dream  and  waking  states.  Hence  the  creation  in  the  intervening 
state  must  be  real  indeed. 

Vedantin :  To  this  the  aphorist  makes  the  rejoinder: 

g  But  (the  dream  creation  is)  mere  Maya, 

because  of  its  nature  of  not  being  a  complete 
manifestation.  (A  different  reading — fully”). 

3 .  But  the  dream  creation  is  a  mere  MdyS,  because  of  its  nature 
of  not  being  a  complete  manifestation  of  the  totality  of  attributes 
(found  in  the  wakeful  state). 

The  word  “but”  refutes  the  opposite  view.  It  is  not  as  you 
asserted,  that  the  creation  in  the  intervening  state  is  real,  for 
the  creation  in  the  intervening  state  is  a  mere  product  of  Maya, 
there  being  not  the  slightest  touch  of  reality  in  it. 

Why? 

“Because  of  its  nature  of  not  being  a  complete  manifestation 
of  the  totality  of  attributes  (found  in  the  wakeful  state)”.  For 
a  dream  is  not  such  by  nature  as  to  be  manifest  with  the  totality 
of  the  attributes  of  a  real  thing. 

Opponent :  What,  again,  is  meant  here  by  totality? 

Vedantin :  It  means  the  state  of  being  endowed  with  the 
adequate  space,  time,  and  circumstances,  as  well  as  its  not  being 
sublated.  For  the  space,  time,  and  causality  adequate  for  a  real 
thing,  as  well  as  the  absence  of  sublation,  can  never  be  possible 
in  the  case  of  a  dream.  For  instance,  the  space  needed  for  a 
chariot  etc.  is  not  possible  in  dream;  for  within  the  narrow  limits 
of  the  body,  the  chariot  etc.  cannot  get  sufficient  room. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  a  dreamer  dreams  outside  the 


III.ii.3] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


591 


body,  since  he  perceives  things  that  are  far  removed.  Moreover, 
the  Upani$ad  also  shows  that  dream  occurs  outside  the  body: 
“The  radiant  infinite  being  who  is  immortal  and  moves  alone 
preserves  the  unclean  nest  (of  a  body)  with  the  help  of  the 
vital  force,  and  roams  out  of  the  body.  Himself  immortal,  he 
goes  wherever  he  likes”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  12).  And  the  difference  in 
the  ideas  (or  perceptions)  of  staying  in  and  moving  out  (occur¬ 
ring  in  dream)  cannot  be  reconciled  unless  the  soul  goes  out. 

Vedantin  :  We  say,  no;  for  it  is  not  possible  to  conceive  it 
for  a  sleeping  man  that  in  a  moment  he  can  reach  a  place 
hundreds  of  miles  away  and  return  from  there.  And  sometimes 
a  man  relates  a  dream  in  which  there  was  no  return,  as  in  the 
statement:  “Then  having  laid  down  in  the  country  of  the  Kurus 
and  fallen  asleep,  I  went  in  dream  to  the  country  of  the 
Pancalas,  and  woke  up  there.”  Had  he  gone  out  of  the  body, 
he  would  have  awakened  in  the  country  of  the  Pancalas 
itself,  as  he  is  supposed  to  have  reached  there;  but  as  a  matter 
of  fact  he  wakes  up  in  the  Kura  country.  And  the  body,  with 
which  the  dreamer  dreams  that  he  goes  to  another  country,  is 
seen  by  people  nearby  to  be  lying  just  where  it  was.  Besides 
the  places,  as  the  dreamer  sees  them  in  dream,  do  not  correspond 
with  actuality.  Were  he  to  speed  away  to  those  places  to  see 
them,  he  would  perceive  them  just  as  he  does  in  the  waking  state. 
Moreover,  the  Upani$ad  shows  that  dream  occurs  within  the  body. 
Opening  with,  “When  it  (the  soul)  remains  in  the  dream  state” 
(Bf.  II.  i.  18),  the  Upani$ad  says,  “it  moves  about,  as  it  pleases, 
in  its  own  body”  (ibid.).  For  this  reason  also,  that  the  Upani$ad 
and  logic  become  contradicted,  the  text  about  “roaming  out  of 
the  nest  (i.e.  body)”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  12)  is  to  be  explained  figur¬ 
atively  to  mean  that  the  immortal  soul  seems  to  go  out  of  the 
body.  For  a  soul,  that  derives  no  benefit  from  the  body  even 
while  inhabiting  it,  is  as  good  as  outside  it.  This  being  so,  the 
different  ideas  (or  perceptions)  like  staying  in,  moving  out, 
etc.  are  to  be  admitted  to  be  illusory.  Moreover,  incongruity  of 
time  is  also  apparent  in  a  dream.  A  man  asleep  at  night  thinks 
that  it  is  daylight  in  India.  Similarly  in  a  dream  lasting  for  a 
moment,  he  sometimes  passes  through  a  number  of  years.  Again, 
the  materials  necessary  for  the  consequent  perceptions  or  actions 


592  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  ii.  3 

are  not  adequately  present.  For  instance,  he  has  no  eye  etc.  for 
the  perception  of  chariot  etc.,  his  senses  having  been  withdrawn 
(in  sleep).  And  from  where  does  come  his  power  to  make  a 
chariot  in  a  moment,  and  from  where  the  timber?  Besides,  these 
chariot  etc.  seen  in  a  dream  are  sublated  in  the  waking  state.  Not 
only  this,  they  are  easily  sublated  in  the  dream  itself,  since  there 
is  contradiction  between  their  beginning  and  end  inasmuch  as 
something  ascertained  in  dream  to  be  a  chariot  turns  into  a  man 
the  next  moment,  or  someone  ascertained  to  be  a  man  changes 
suddenly  into  a  tree.  The  scripture  also  tells  us  clearly  that 
chariot  etc.  do  not  exist  in  dream:  “There  are  no  chariots,  no 
animals  to  be  yoked  to  them,  nor  roads  there”  (Bj:.  IV.  iii.  10). 
Hence  things  seen  in  a  dream  are  mere  Maya. 

^PP*r  %  51%?:  IlYll 

(Dream  is)  Tf  also  an  omen;  for  (this  is  known)  ^ 
from  the  Upani$ads,  ^  and  rTcf-fas:  experts  in  dream-reading 
3TT TO5*  say  (so). 

4.  A  dream  is  also  an  omen ,  for  so  it  is  known  from  the  Upa - 
ni$ads,  and  experts  say  so. 

Opponent :  In  that  case,  since  it  is  all  mere  Maya,  there  is  no 
touch  of  reality  in  dream. 

Vedantin :  We  say,  no;  for  dream  becomes  the  indicator  also 
of  good  and  evil  in  future.  Thus  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Upanisad: 
“If  one  should  see  a  woman  in  dreams  while  engaged  in  per¬ 
forming  some  rites  with  a  view  to  getting  results,  then  one 
should  know  from  the  occurrence  of  the  dreams  that  those 
rites  will  be  fruitful”  (Ch.  V.  ii.  8).  Similarly  the  scriptures 
declare  that  the  text,  “Should  a  man  dream  of  a  black  person 
with  black  teeth,  that  person  will  cause  his  death”  and  such 
other  texts  indicate  imminent  death.  Moreover,  people  con¬ 
versant  with  the  science  of  dream,  say,  “Dreams  of  mounting 
on  elephants  etc.  are  auspicious,  whereas  those  of  mounting  on 
ass  etc.  are  bad  omens”.  They  think  that  some  dreams  caused 
by  mantras ,  gods,  and  special  substances  have  a  touch  of  reality 
in  them.  But  even  in  these  cases,  though  it  may  be  granted  that 


III.  ii.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  593 

the  things  prognosticated  are  true,  the  indicative  omens  like  the 
seeing  of  a  woman  are  certainly  unreal,  for  these  get  sublated. 
This  is  the  idea.  Hence  it  is  proved  that  a  dream  is  merely 
illusory. 

As  for  the  reference  to  the  Upani$adic  text  in  the  aphorism, 
“because  the  Upani$ad  says  so”  (III.  ii.  1),  that  should  be 
explained  in  a  figurative  sense  in  the  light  of  the  conclu¬ 
sion  arrived  at  thus.  This  is  like  the  statement,  “The  plough 
sustains  the  bullocks”,  where  the  plough  is  said  to  be  the  cause 
of  sustenance  because  it  is  metaphorically  so.  Not  that  the 
plough  really  sustains  the  bullocks  etc.  So  also  from  the  mere 
fact  that  a  sleeping  man  becomes  an  accidental  cause  for  crea¬ 
tion,  it  is  said  that  he  creates  the  chariots  etc.  and  that  “he  is 
the  agent”  (Bj*.  IV.  iii.  9-10).  And  it  is  to  be  explained  that  the 
soul  becomes  an  accidental  cause  for  the  creation  of  chariot  etc. 
in  the  sense  that  happiness  and  fear  are  seen  to  arise  from  the 
sight  of  chariot  etc.,  of  which  merit  and  demerit  are  the  causes, 
and  the  soul  is  the  efficient  cause  of  those  merit  and  demerit. 
Moreover,  the  topic  of  dream  is  introduced  for  revealing  the 
self-effulgence  of  the  witnessing  Self  as  a  distinct  fact.  This  is 
done  because  in  the  waking  state  we  have  the  existence  of  the 
contact  between  the  objects  and  senses  and  an  admixture  of  the 
light  of  the  sun  etc.,  so  that  the  self-effulgence  of  the  Self  cannot 
be  distinguished  from  them.  That  being  the  case,  if  the  text 
about  creation  of  chariot  etc.  be  taken  in  the  literal  sense,  then 
the  self-effulgence  of  the  Self  will  remain  undetermined.  Hence 
in  the  light  of  the  mention  of  the  unreality  of  chariot  etc.,  it  is 
to  be  explained  that  the  text  about  the  creation  of  these  is 
figurative.  Hereby  is  explained  the  text  about  creatorship  (B.  S. 
III.  ii.  2,  Ka.  II.  ii.  8). 

And  the  assertion  was  made  that  the  followers  of  a  particular 
branch  of  the  Vedas  consider  this  creator  to  be  the  supreme 
conscious  Self;  that  too  is  improper;  for  in  another  Upani$ad 
this  is  shown  to  be  the  activity  of  the  individual  soul  in  the 
text,  “Himself  puts  the  body  aside  and  himself  creates  (a  dream 
body  in  its  place),  revealing  his  own  lustre  by  his  own  light — 
and  he  dreams”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  9).  In  the  text  under  discussion  also, 
it  is  shown  by  a  restatement  of  a  known  fact  in,  “He  who  keeps 
38 


594  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAJYA  [  III.  ii.  4 

awake  even  when  the  senses  fall  asleep”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  8),  that  this 
creator  of  desirable  things  is  none  other  than  the  individual  soul. 
In  the  complementary  portion  of  the  passage,  however,  the 
individuality  of  that  soul  is  removed  and  it  is  shown  to  be  none 
other  than  Brahman  in  the  text,  “He  is  pure  and  He  is  Brahman” 
(Ka.  II.  ii.  8),  even  as  it  is  done  in  such  texts  as,  “That  thou  art” 
(Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi).  Thus  it  does  not  go  against  the  topic  of 
Brahman  with  which  the  context  deals.  Nor  do  we  deny  the 
activity  of  the  supreme  Self  even  during  dream,  for  that 
supreme  Self  is  the  Lord  of  all;  and  as  such  it  is  He  who  can 
be  reasonably  upheld  to  be  the  ordainer  under  all  circumstances. 
But  what  we  want  to  show  is  only  this  much  that  in  truth,  this 
creation  in  dream  is  not  of  the  same  order  of  reality  as  the 
creation  of  space  etc.  And  yet  the  creation  of  space  etc.  also 
has  no  absolute  reality;  for  under  the  aphorism,  “The  effect  is 
non-different  from  the  cause  since  terms  like  ‘origin’  etc.  are 
met  with”  (II.  i.  14),  we  showed  that  the  whole  creation  is 
but  Maya.  But  before  the  realization  of  the  identity  of  the  Self 
with  Brahman,  creation  counting  from  space  etc.,  continues  just 
as  it  is,  whereas  the  creation  within  dream  is  abrogated  every 
day.  Hence  the  statement  that  dream  is  merely  Maya  has  a 
special  significance. 

cRlt  fSPPI  \\%\\ 

By  meditation  on  the  supreme  Lord, 
that  which  is  obscured  (becomes  manifest);  for  cRT:  from 
Him  (are  derived)  arpr  its  (the  soul’s)  bondage  and 

its  opposite. 

S.  From  the  meditation  on  the  supreme  Lord ,  however, 
becomes  manifest  that  which  remains  obscured;  because  the 
souYs  bondage  and  freedom  are  derived  from  Him . 

Opponent :  Even  so,  it  may  be  that  the  individual  soul  is  a 
part  of  the  supreme  Self  just  as  a  spark  is  of  a  fire.  That  being 
so,  just  as  the  fire  and  the  spark  have  the  same  power  of  com¬ 
bustion  and  light,  so  also  the  soul  and  God  have  the  same  power 
of  knowledge,  divinity,  (true  resolve,  etc).  And  from  this  it 


III.  ii.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA?YA  595 

follows  that  the  soul  can  through  its  divinity  (i.e.  true  resolve), 
create  such  things  in  dream  as  a  chariot  as  an  act  of  its  will. 

Vedantin :  To  this  it  is  said:  Though  the  soul  and  God  may 
be  related  as  the  part  and  the  whole,  still  the  soul  is  directly  seen 
to  be  possessed  of  attributes  opposed  to  those  of  God. 

Opponent :  Do  you  mean  that  the  soul  has  no  attribute  similar 
to  God’s? 

Vedantin :  Not  that  it  has  not;  but  though  present,  this 
similarity  remains  hidden,  since  it  is  screened  off  by  ignorance. 
That  similarity,  remaining  hidden,  becomes  manifest  in  the  case 
of  some  rare  person  who  meditates  on  God  with  diligence,  for 
whom  the  darkness  of  ignorance  gets  removed,  and  who  becomes 
endowed  with  mystic  powers  through  the  grace  of  God,  like 
the  regaining  of  the  power  of  sight  through  the  potency  of 
medicine  by  a  man  who  had  lost  it  through  the  disease  called 
tnrnra .  But  it  does  not  come  naturally  to  all  and  sundry. 

Why? 

Vedantin :  Because  “from  him”,  i.e.  owing  to  God,  are  “his”, 
of  this  creature,  “bondage  and  freedom”,  bondage  that  comes 
from  the  ignorance  about  the  nature  of  God  and  freedom  that 
comes  from  the  knowledge  of  His  reality.  To  this  effect  occurs 
the  Upani$adic  text,  “On  the  realization  of  the  Deity  (i.e. 
Brahman  with  attributes),  all  the  bondages  (i.e.  such  evils  as 
ignorance,  desire,  etc.)  fall  off;  and  on  the  eradication  of  these 
evils,  there  is  complete  cessation  of  birth  and  death.  But  (as 
compared  with  bondage  and  freedom)  the  third  thing  (viz 
mystic  powers)  occurs  as  a  result  of  meditation  on  Him  (with 
attributes),  and  after  the  death  of  the  body  comes  unsurpassable 
divinity,  and  after  that  one  becomes  the  Absolute  with  all  the 
desires  fulfilled”  (Sv.  I.  11).  There  are  also  other  texts  of  this 
kind. 


tfsfa  ll^lt 

«(T  Or  rather  owing  to  connection  with  the  body 

(occurs)  that  (covering)  arfa  also. 

6.  Or  rather  that  covering  occurs  also  on  account  of  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  body. 


596 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.ii.6 


Opponent :  If  the  soul  be  3  part  of  God,  why  should  it  have 
its  knowledge  and  divinity  (Lordship)  under  cover,  the  reason¬ 
able  position  being  that  knowledge  and  divinity  should  remain 
uncovered  for  a  soul  as  much  as  combustion  and  illumination 
remain  so  for  a  spark? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is  being  given:  What  you  say  is  truly 
so.  But  “that  too”,  that  covering  up  also,  of  knowledge  and 
divinity,  in  the  case  of  the  individual  soul,  “occurs  from  the 
connection  with  the  body”,  from  the  association  with  body, 
senses,  mind,  intelligence,  perception  of  objects,  etc.,  And  we 
have  an  analogy  on  this  point:  As  the  power  of  combustion  and 
illumination,  though  inherent  in  fire,  remains  hidden  for  it  when 
it  is  (latent)  inside  the  fuel,  or  as  it  remains  hidden  when  the  fire 
is  covered  with  ashes,  similarly  there  occurs  a  covering  up  of 
the  knowledge  and  Lordship  of  the  soul  owing  to  an  error  of 
non-distinction  of  the  soul  from  the  body  etc.,  arising  from  its 
association  with  the  limiting  adjunct  comprising  the  body  etc., 
and  created  by  name  and  form,  which  are  conjured  up  by 
nescience.  The  words  “or  rather”  (in  the  aphorism)  are  meant 
for  obviating  the  misconception  about  the  difference  between 
the  soul  and  God. 

Opponent :  Why  should  not  the  soul  be  accepted  as  different 
from  God,  since  its  knowledge  and  Lordship  are  covered  up? 
What  is  the  need  of  fancying  this  as  arising  from  association 
with  the  body? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is  in  the  negative;  for  it  does  not  stand 
to  reason  that  the  soul  can  be  different  from  God.  For  starting 
with  the  text,  “That  Deity,  that  was  such,  deliberated”  (Ch.  VI. 
iii.  2),  the  individual  soul  is  referred  to  by  the  word  Self  in  the 
text,  “I  Myself  having  entered  into  it  as  this  individual  soul” 
(ibid.).  And  in  the  text,  “That  is  Truth;  That  is  the  Self,  That 
thou  art,  O  Svetaketu”  (Ch.  VI.  viii-xv),  the  individual  is  taught 
as  being  identical  with  God.  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  though 
the  individual  soul  is  non-different  from  God,  its  knowledge  and 
Lordship  become  covered  up  owing  to  association  with  the 
body.  From  this  also  it  follows  that  the  creation  of  chariot  etc. 
in  dream  is  not  an  achievement  of  the  individual  soul  by  its  will. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  dream  creation  were  an  act  of  will,  one 


IILii.7]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  597 

would  not  have  an  evil  dream,  for  one  does  not  will  evil  for 
oneself.  As  for  the  statement  that  the  Upani$adic  text  equating 
dream  with  waking  (viz  Bj\  IV.  iii.  14 — “others,  however,  say 
that  the  dream  state  of  a  man  is  nothing  but  the  waking  state” 
etc.),  declares  the  reality  of  dream,  that  declaration  of  similarity 
does  not  signify  reality,  for  that  would  run  counter  to  the 
self-effulgence  of  the  Self.  Moreover,  the  Upani$ad  itself  shows 
the  absence  of  chariot  etc.  in  dream.  The  idea  implied  there  is 
that  dream  being  a  product  of  the  impressions  acquired  during 
wakefulness,  it  has  the  verisimilitude  of  wakefulness.  Hence  it  is 
reasonable  to  say  that  dream  is  mere  Maya. 

Topic  2:  The  Soul  in  Deep  Sleep 

^  INI 

The  absence  of  that  (dream),  (that  is  to  say,  deep 
sleep),  (takes  place)  in  the  nerves  xf  and  an^rf^f  in  the 

Self,  that  being  known  from  the  Upani$ads. 

7.  The  absence  of  that  dream  ( i.e.  dreamless  sleep)  takes  place 
in  the  nerves  and  the  Self ,  as  it  is  known  to  be  so  from  the 
Upanifads. 

The  dream  state  has  been  considered:  now  is  being  considered 
the  state  of  sleep.  Here  are  some  Upani$adic  passages  about 
sleep:  “Now  then,  (among  these  states),  when  one  sleeps  in 
such  a  way,  that  all  his  organs  are  withdrawn  and  he  becomes 
completely  serene  (in  mind)  and  does  not  dream,  then  the 
soul  remains  spread  over  these  nerves”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  3).  In 
another  place,  however,  in  connection  with  these  very  nerves 
it  is  heard,  “it  comes  back  along  the  seventy-two  thousand 
nerves  called  hit&,  which  extend  from  the  heart  to  the  pericar¬ 
dium,  and  sleeps  in  the  puritat”  (i.e.  the  heart)  (Bj;.  II.  i.  19). 
Elsewhere  also,  while  dealing  with  the  nerves  themselves,  it  is 
said,  “When  the  sleeping  individual  sees  no  dream,  he  happens 
to  be  in  those  nerves;  then  he  becomes  united  in  this  Prana ” 
(Kau.  IV.  19).  Similarly  in  another  place:  “And  (he)  lies  in 
the  Akasa  (supreme  Self)  that  is  in  the  heart”  (Bj\  II.  i.  17). 


598  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [m.  ii.  7 

So  also  elsewhere:  “O  amiable  one,  then  he  becomes  unified 
with  Existence,  he  attains  his  own  Self”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1),  as 
also,  “So  this  infinite  Being  (Self),  fully  embraced  by  the 
Conscious  Self  (supreme  Self),  does  not  know  anything  at  all, 
either  external  or  internal”  (Bj*.  IV.  iii.  21). 

Doubt :  While  on  this  subject,  the  doubt  arises:  Are  these 
nerves  and  other  places  of  sleep  different  from  one  another,  or 
are  they  mutually  interdependent  and  constitute  a  single  place 
of  sleep?  What  should  be  the  conclusion  here? 

Opponent :  They  are  different  places. 

Why? 

Since  they  are  meant  to  serve  the  same  purpose.  Things  that 
are  meant  to  serve  the  same  purpose  are  not  seen  to  depend  on 
one  another,  as  in  the  case  of  paddy,  barley,  etc.  (optionally 
used  for  sacrificial  cakes).  And  the  nerves  etc.  are  seen  to  serve 
the  same  purpose  during  sleep;  for  in  “remains  spread  over  these 
nerves”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  3),  “sleeps  in  the  puritat ”  (Bj\  II.  ii.  19), 
the  seventh  (locative)  case-ending  (“in”)  is  seen  to  be  equally 
in  use. 

Objection :  But  in  the  case  of  Existence  (Sat)  the  seventh 
case-ending  is  not  used  thus  in,  “O  amiable  one,  he  then  becomes 
unified  with  Existence”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1)  (where  the  instru¬ 
mental  case  is  used). 

Opponent :  This  is  no  defect;  for  there  too  the  sense  of  the 
seventh  case  can  be  understood;  for  in  the  complementary 
passage  it  is  stated  that  the  individual  soul,  in  search  of  an  abode 
repairs  to  Existence:  “Not  getting  an  abode  anywhere  else,  he 
resorts  to  Prana  Itself”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  2),  where  the  Existence 
under  discussion  is  referred  to  by  the  word  Prana.  And  the 
sense  of  the  seventh  case  is  implied  in  the  word  dyatana  (abode). 
Moreover  the  use  of  the  seventh  case  is  clearly  in  evidence  in 
the  complementary  text:  “Having  become  merged  in  Existence, 
they  do  not  know,  We  have  become  merged  in  Existence’  ” 
(Ch.  VI.  ix.  2).  In  all  these  cases,  the  nature  of  deep  sleep, 
consisting  in  the  cessation  of  particularized  knowledge,  does 
not  differ.  Therefore,  it  follows  that  since  the  nerves  etc.  serve 
the  same  purpose,  the  soul  resorts  optionally  to  some  one  of 
them  some  time  for  its  sleep. 


III.  ii.  7]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  599 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  being  explained:  “The 
absence  of  that  takes  place  in  the  nerves  and  the  Self”.  “The 
absence  of  that”  means  the  absence  of  the  relevant  dreaming, 
that  is  to  say  deep  sleep.  That  occurs  in  the  nerves  and  the  Self. 
By  the  use  of  “and”  in  the  sense  of  combination,  the  idea 
conveyed  is  that  the  soul  resorts  to  these  nerves  etc.  collectively 
for  sleep  and  not  alternatively. 

Whence  is  it  so? 

Since  it  is  seen  to  be  so  from  the  Upani$ads.  To  explain:  All 
these  nerves  and  other  things  are  mentioned  in  the  respective 
contexts  (in  the  Upani$ads)  as  the  places  of  sleep;  and  all  these 
become  reconciled  if  they  are  accepted  collectively,  whereas  if 
they  are  accepted  alternatively  then  the  others  become  ruled 
out. 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  pointed  out  that,  serving  as  they  do 
the  same  purpose  like  paddy,  barley  etc.,  the  nerves,  ( puritat , 
and  Self),  can  be  accepted  alternatively? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is,  no.  From  the  mere  fact  that  the 
same  case-ending  is  used  it  does  not  follow  that  they  serve  the 
same  purpose  or  that  they  can  be  taken  alternatively.  For  even 
in  the  case  of  things  having  divergent  purposes  as  well  as  some 
collective  purpose,  the  same  case-ending  is  found  to  be  used,  as 
in,  “He  sleeps  in  a  palace,  he  sleeps  in  a  couch”2,  and  such  other 
instances.  Similarly  it  is  but  reasonable  here  that  a  combination 
is  to  be  accepted  in  the  sense  that  he  sleeps  in  the  nerves,  Puritat , 
and  Brahman.  In  support  of  this  is  the  Upani$adic  text,  “When 
the  individual  soul  sees  no  dream,  he  happens  to  be  in  those 
nerves;  then  he  becomes  united  in  the  Prana ”  (Kau.  IV.  19), 
where  the  text  speaks  collectively  of  the  nerves  and  Pr&%a  in 
deep  sleep;  for  both  are  presented  in  the  very  same  sentence. 
And  it  has  been  ascertained  that  Prana  is  Brahman  in  the 
aphorism,  uPrana  is  Brahman,  because  it  can  be  harmonized  thus” 
(B.  S.  I.  i.  28).  Where  the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  the  nerves  as 
though  they  are  independent  places  of  sleep  as  in,  “Then  he 
remains  asleep  in  these  nerves”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  3),  there  also 

8  The  palace  contains  the  couch  which  helps  sleep.  Their  purposes  are 
different;  and  yet  both  help  sleep  indirectly  and  directly  and  thus  become 
associated. 


600  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.ii.7 

Brahman,  well  known  (to  be  the  place  of  sleep)  from  other 
texts  is  not  ruled  out,  and  hence  the  idea  derived  is  that  the  soul 
rests  in  Brahman  by  proceeding  along  the  nerves.  Even  from 
such  a  viewpoint  the  use  of  the  locative  case  after  the  nerves 
is  not  contradicted;  for  though  the  soul  approaches  Brahman 
through  the  nerves,  it  happens  to  be  in  the  nerves,  just  as  a  man 
proceeding  to  the  sea  along  the  river  Ganga,  remains  as  a 
matter  of  fact  in  the  Ganga.  Moreover,  the  thing  sought  to  be 
taught  in  this  text  (Ch.  VIIL  vi)  is  the  path  constituted  by  the 
nerves  and  the  rays  and  leading  to  the  world  of  Brahman.  The 
declaration  about  the  soul’s  remaining  spread  over  the  nerves  is 
meant  for  eulogizing  the  nerves;  for  first  it  is  said,  “He  remains 
spread  over  the  nerves”,  and  then  it  is  added,  “no  sin  touches 
him”  (Ch.  VIIL  vi.  3),  in  which  latter  sentence  the  nerves  are 
praised.  The  reason  for  being  free  from  the  touch  of  sin  is  also 
stated  in,  “For  he  then  becomes  enveloped  by  tejas  (light)” 
(ibid.),  which  means  that  the  organs  of  the  soul  then  become 
enveloped  by  the  light  (of  the  sun  in  the  nerves)  called  bile, 
and  so  it  cannot  perceive  external  things.  Or  by  the  term  “by 
light”,  Brahman  Itself  is  referred  to,  for  in  another  Upani$ad, 
the  word  tejas  (light)  is  used  for  Brahman  in  the  text,  “Brahman, 
Itself,  the  Light”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  7).  The  idea  implied  is  that  since 
the  soul  then  becomes  unified  with  Brahman  by  proceeding 
along  the  nerves,  therefore  no  sin  can  touch  it;  for  from  such 
Upani§adic  text  as,  “All  sins  turn  back  from  here,  for  this  is  the 
world  of  Brahman  that  is  unafflicted  by  sin”  (Ch.  VIII.  iv.  1), 
it  is  known  that  merger  in  Brahman  is  the  cause  for  remaining 
untouched  by  sin.  This  being  so,  the  conclusion  arrived  at  is 
that  the  nerves,  dependent  on  Brahman  as  they  are,  have  to  be 
construed  as  the  place  of  sleep  collectively  with  Brahman  which 
is  well  known  to  be  the  place  of  sleep  from  other  Upani$adic 
texts.  So  also  the  puritat ,  having  been  mentioned  in  connection 
with  Brahman,  is  understood  to  become  a  place  of  sleep  in 
subordination  to  Brahman,  which  fact  is  known  thus:  The 
Akafa  (Brahman)  in  the  heart,  which  is  the  place  of  sleep,  is 
introduced  in,  “And  lies  in  the  Akdsa  that  is  in  the  heart”  (Bp. 
II.  i.  17);  and  in  that  context  it  is  said,  “sleeps  in  the  puritat”. 
(Bj\  II.  i.  19).  By  the  word  puritat  is  meant  a  covering  of  the 


III.ii.7] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


601 


heart.  One  sleeping  in  the  AkdSa  within  the  heart,  enveloped 
by  the  puritat ,  may  as  well  be  said  to  be  sleeping  in  the  puritat ; 
for  somebody  living  within  a  city  surrounded  by  a  rampart  is 
said  to  be  living  in  the  rampart.  Now,  under  the  aphorism,  “The 
small  Akdsa  (i.e.  space  in  the  heart)  is  Brahman,  because  of  the 
subsequent  reasons”  (I.  iii.  14),  it  was  ascertained  earlier  that 
the  Akdsa  in  the  heart  is  Brahman.  And  from  the  reference  to 
the  nerves  and  puritat  in  the  same  sentence,  “It  comes  back 
through  the  nerves  called  hitd  and  sleeps  in  the  puritat”  (Bj-.  II. 
i.  19),  it  is  known  that  the  nerves  and  puritat  are  to  be  construed 
collectively.  Besides  “Existence”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1)  and  “Con¬ 
scious  Self”  (Bj-.  IV.  iii.  19)  are  well  known  to  be  terms  denoting 
Brahman.  In  these  Upani$adic  texts  three  places  only  are  men¬ 
tioned  as  the  places  of  sleep — the  nerves,  the  puritat ,  and 
Brahman.  Among  these  the  nerves,  as  also  the  puritat ,  are  mere 
entrances,  Brahman  alone,  without  a  second,  being  the  unchang¬ 
ing  place  of  sleep.  Moreover,  the  nerves  as  well  as  the  puritat 
become  merely  the  encasements  for  the  individual  soul  by  virtue 
of  being  its  limiting  adjuncts,  for  in  them  exist  its  organs. 
Without  the  association  with  the  limiting  adjuncts,  the  soul 
cannot  have  any  natural  encasement,  since  it  is  ever  established 
in  its  own  glory  owing  to  its  identity  with  Brahman.  As  for  its 
having  Brahman  as  its  locus  (or  abode)  during  sleep,  that  too 
is  not  stated  by  way  of  making  a  distinction  as  between  a 
container  and  the  thing  contained. 

In  what  way  then? 

By  way  of  showing  their  identity,  since  it  is  said,  “O  amiable 
one,  he  then  becomes  unified  with  Existence,  he  attains  his  own 
Self’  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1),  where  the  supreme  Self  is  referred  to  by 
the  phrase  “own  Self  (sva)”,  the  idea  implied  being  that  a  man 
while  asleep  remains  established  in  his  true  nature.  Moreover 
there  is  no  time  when  the  soul  is  not  in  union  with  Brahman, 
since  one’s  own  nature  is  unchangeable.  But  the  statement,  “He 
attains  his  own  Self’  is  made,  because  in  dream  and  wakefulness 
the  soul  seems  to  assume  another’s  garb  under  the  influence  of 
the  limiting  adjuncts  with  which  it  remains  associated,  whereas 
in  sleep  that  garb  falls  off,  so  that  in  comparison  with  the  earlier 
stages,  sleep  is  sought  to  be  spoken  of  as  the  state  of  assumption 


602  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  7 

of  the  real  nature.  From  this  it  is  clear  that  it  is  improper  to  say 
that  in  sleep  the  soul  sometimes  becomes  unified  with  Existence 
and  sometimes  not.  Besides,  even  if  it  be  understood  that  sleep 
can  have  different  alternative  loci,  still  deep  sleep,  as  consisting 
in  the  cessation  of  particularized  perception,  is  always  the  same. 
And  under  such  circumstances,  it  is  but  logical  that  a  soul, 
merged  in  Existence,  should  not  know  anything  just  because  of 
its  non-duality,  as  is  shown  in  the  text,  “then  what  should  one 
know  and  through  what?”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  14).  But  should  the  soul 
sleep  in  the  nerves  or  the  puritat,  no  reason  for  its  non-recogni¬ 
tion  of  objects  can  be  ascertained,  since  (particularized)  cogni¬ 
tion  is  concerned  with  duality  (and  duality  is  present  there),  as 
is  shown  in  the  text,  “When  there  is  something  else,  as  it  were, 
then  one  can  see  something”.  (Bf.  IV.  iii.  31). 

Opponent :  Even  things  within  duality  may  remain  unknown 
owing  to  great  distance  etc. 

Vedantin :  This  can  be  truly  so,  if  the  individual  soul  is 
supposed  to  be  naturally  limited,  even  as  Vi$oumitra  (who  is 
different  from  his  house)  does  not  see  his  own  house  when  on 
a  sojourn.  But  the  soul  has  no  limitation  apart  from  that  caused 
by  conditioning  factors.  Even  if  you  say  that  in  the  case  of  the 
soul  also,  non-cognition  is  caused  by  the  great  distance  etc. 
inherent  in  the  limiting  adjuncts,  still  the  reasonable  position  is 
that  when  the  adjuncts  cease  in  sleep,  the  soul  does  not  know 
because  of  its  merger  in  Existence  Itself.  But  when  talking  of  a 
collection  of  factors  (in  sleep),  we  do  not  suggest  here  that  the 
nerves  etc.  combine  in  equal  partnership  (with  Brahman);  for 
nothing  is  gained  from  the  knowledge  that  the  nerves,  as  also 
the  puritat ,  are  the  locus  of  sleep,  since  neither  any  result  is 
mentioned  in  the  Upani$ads  as  attached  to  such  a  knowledge 
itself,  nor  is  it  construed  that  such  a  knowledge  forms  part  of 
something  else  that  has  its  own  result.  We  are  out  to  prove  that 
Brahman  is  the  invariable  locus  of  sleep.  Such  a  knowledge 
serves  a  purpose,  namely  that  the  soul  is  ascertained  to  be 
identical  with  Brahman,  and  it  is  realized  to  be  free  from  the 
dealings  consequent  on  the  dream  and  wakeful  states.  Hence  the 
Self  is  the  locus  of  sleep. 


m.  ii.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  603 

am:  INI 

3RT:  Hence  VR\q:  awakening  (is)  from  this. 

8.  For  the  same  reason ,  the  sours  waking  up  is  from  this 
supreme  Self . 

Since  the  Self  Itself  is  the  locus  of  sleep,  therefore,  for  that 
very  reason,  it  is  taught  in  the  context  of  sleep  that  wakefulness 
occurs  invariably  from  this  Self’  by  the  texts,  “As  from  a  fire 
tiny  sparks  fly  in  all  directions,  so  from  the  Self  emanate  all 
organs”  (Bj\  II.  i.  20),  etc.,  said  in  the  course  of  the  answer  to 
the  question,  “Whence  did  it  come?”  (Bj\  II.  i.  16).  This  is  done 
also  by  the  text,  “Having  emerged  from  Existence,  they  do  not 
know,  4We  have  come  from  Existence’”  (Ch.  IV.  x.  2).  Had 
the  loci  of  sleep  been  but  optional,  the  Upani$ad  would  have 
instructed  that  the  soul  wakes  up  sometimes  from  the  nerves, 
sometimes  from  the  puritat,  and  sometimes  from  the  Self.  From 
this  also  follows  that  the  Self  is  the  locus  of  sleep. 

Topic  3:  The  Same  Soul  Returns  from  Sleep 

a  ipr  g  ii£U 

^  But  q*  that  (soul)  itself  (returns) 
because  of  the  reasons  of  action,  remembrance,  scriptural 
authority,  and  injunction. 

9 .  But  the  very  same  soul  returns  from  sleep  because  of  the' 
reasons  of  action ,  remembrance ,  scriptural  authority ,  and  injunc¬ 
tion. 

Doubt :  It  is  being  considered  whether  the  one  who  awakes 
from  that  merger  in  Existence  is  the  same  at  the  time  of  awaken¬ 
ing  as  one  was  at  the  time  of  merger,  or  whether  it  may  either 
be  the  same  entity  or  some  one  else. 

Opponent :  When  under  this  doubt,  the  conclusion  arrived  at 
is  that  there  is  no  hard  and  fast  rule. 

Why? 

When  a  drop  of  water  is  thrown  into  a  mass  of  water,  it 


604  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [HI.  ii.  9 

becomes  one  with  that  mass.  And  when  an  attempt  is  made  to 
take  it  up  again  from  there,  it  is  impossible  to  have  that  very 
same  drop.  Similarly  when  the  sleeping  soul  has  become  one 
with  the  supreme  Self  and  has  attained  quiescence  (i.e.  freedom 
from  everything),  that  very  soul  cannot  wake  up  again.  Hence 
the  conclusion  is  that  the  waking  being  may  be  either  the  original 
soul,  or  he  may  be  God,  or  some  other  individual  soul. 

Vedantin :  To  this  the  aphorist  says,  “But  (it  is)  the  very 
same  soul”,  which  had  gone  to  sleep  and  attained  its  own  Self, 
that  rises  up  again;  and  it  is  none  else. 

What  are  the  reasons  for  that? 

“Because  of  the  reasons  of  action,  remembrance,  scriptural 
authority,  and  injunction.”  We  shall  elaborate  the  reasons 
separately.  To  begin,  the  selfsame  soul  alone  can  awake,  and 
none  else,  because  an  unfinished  action  is  seen  to  be  resumed. 
Thus  one  is  seen  to  take  up  and  finish  a  piece  of  work  left 
incomplete  on  the  previous  day.  One  cannot  reasonably  engage 
oneself  in  some  work  left  incomplete  by  another,  since  a  con¬ 
trary  view  will  lead  to  unwarranted  conclusions.  Hence  it  is 
understood  that  the  same  person  is  the  doer  of  the  same  work 
on  the  previous  and  next  days.  For  this  further  reason  also  the 
selfsame  person  wakes  up:  If  the  person  waking  up  be  different, 
then  there  should  be  no  memory  of  what  was  perceived  earlier, 
which  proposition  is  contrary  to  what  is  evident  in  the  recol¬ 
lection,  “I  saw  this  on  the  previous  day”.  For  something  seen 
by  one  cannot  be  remembered  by  another.  And  a  recognition 
like,  “I  am  that  very  person”,  in  which  one’s  own  identity  is 
recognized  cannot  be  imagined  to  occur  if  some  other  soul 
should  wake  up.  Again,  from  scriptural  texts  it  is  known  that 
the  selfsame  person  wakes  up,  as  for  instance,  “He  comes  back 
again  in  the  inverse  order  to  his  former  condition,  the  waking 
state”  (Bj%  IV.  iii.  16),  “All  these  creatures  who  repair  to  this 
world  of  Brahman  every  day,  do. not  know  It”  (Ch.  VIII.  iii.  2), 
and  “Whatever  they  might  have  been  here  (in  the  previous 
waking  state) — be  it  a  tiger,  a  lion,  a  wolf,  a  boar,  a  worm,  an 
insect,  a  gnat,  or  a  mosquito,  they  become  those  very  creatures 
then  (after  waking  from  sleep)”  (Ch.  VI.  ix.  3).  These  and 
other  texts  occurring  in  the  context  of  sleep  and  waking  up 


ni.  ii.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  605 

cannot  be  reconciled  if  the  waking  soul  be  different.  This  also 
is  the  conclusion  that  follows  from  the  injunctions  about  rites 
and  meditations;  for  else  the  injunctions  about  rites  and  medita¬ 
tions  become  useless,  since  on  the  supposition  of  some  other 
soul  waking  up,  the  conclusion  will  be  that  any  one  becomes 
free  as  soon  as  one  goes  to  sleep.  And  if  this  be  the  case,  then 
would  you  tell  me  what  is  the  need  of  undertaking  a  rite  or  a 
meditation  that  will  yield  its  fruit  in  future?  Again,  on  the 
hypothesis  that  some  other  (bound)  soul  wakes  up,  it  will 
either  mean  that  some  soul  that  had  been  working  through  a 
second  body  wakes  up  (in  the  sleeping  body  under  considera¬ 
tion),  in  which  case  there  will  be  the  predicament  of  that 
(active)  soul’s  activity  ceasing  in  that  second  body.  Or  if  it  be 
held  that  the  soul  sleeping  in  the  second  body  wakes  up  in  the 
first,  then  that  supposition  is  useless;  for  when  one  sleeping  in 
any  body  can  wake  up  in  that  very  body,  what  do  you  gain 
by  supposing  that  some  one  sleeping  in  one  body  wakes  up  in 
another?  Again,  if  it  be  held  that  a  free  soul  wakes  up  in  the 
body  (in  which  another  had  slept),  then  liberation  will  become 
terminable.  Moreover,  it  is  illogical  that  one  for  whom  ignorance 
has  ceased  should  become  embodied  again.  Hereby  is  also 
refuted  the  view  that  God  wakes  up  in  the  body,  since  in  Him 
ignorance  is  eternally  absent.  Besides,  the  defects  of  deriving 
some  unearned  result  and  losing  something  earned  will  be  inevi¬ 
table  on  the  supposition  that  some  other  soul  wakes  up  in  the 
body  after  sleep.  Hence  that  very  (sleeping)  soul  wakes  up  and 
none  else. 

And  it  was  argued  that  just  as  a  drop  of  water  thrown  into  a 
mass  of  water  cannot  be  singled  out,  so  also  a  soul  merging  in 
Existence  cannot  spring  up  again.  That  is  being  refuted.  In  the 
analogy  it  is  quite  in  order  to  say  that  the  (selfsame)  drop  of 
water  cannot  be  singled  out,  since  there  is  nothing  to  mark  out 
its  individuality.  But  here  we  have  karma  and  ignorance  as  the 
factors  making  the  (individual)  distinction.  The  two  cases  are 
thus  different.  Moreover,  it  is  a  matter  of  experience  that  though 
milk  and  water,  when  mixed  together,  cannot  be  separated  by 
any  one  of  the  human  race,  still  they  can  be  separated  by  ducks. 
Besides,  there  is  no  such  entity,  different  from  the  supreme 


606  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii. 9 

Self,  which  has  to  be  distinguished  from  Existence  like  a  drop 
of  water  from  a  mass  of  water.  It  has  been  shown  more  than 
once  that  Existence  Itself  comes  to  be  called  indirectly  a  soul, 
because  of  the  intervention  of  limiting  adjuncts.  This  being  the 
case,  as  long  as  a  soul  continues  to  be  bound  up  with  a  particular 
set  of  adjuncts,  so  long  do  we  deal  with  it  as  the  very  same  one; 
and  when  it  comes  to  be  bound  up  with  another  set  of  adjuncts, 
we  deal  with  it  as  though  it  is  different.  That  very  same  set  of 
adjuncts  persists  in  sleep  and  wakefulness  on  the  maxim  of  the 
seed  and  seedling,  so  that  the  reasonable  position  is  that  the 
selfsame  soul  wakes  up  from  sleep. 

Topic  4:  Soul  in  Swoon 

H HI 

i pr  In  the  case  of  a  person  in  swoon  occurs  only 

partial  attainment  (of  the  state  of  sleep),  that  being  the 

last  alternative. 

10.  In  the  case  of  one  in  swoon,  there  is  only  partial  attorn¬ 
ment  (of  the  state  of  sleep),  that  being  the  last  alternative. 

Opponent :  There  is  such  a  phenomenon  as  a  man  in  a  swoon 
whom  people  call  unconscious.  When  the  condition  of  such  a 
man  is  under  scrutiny,  it  is  said:  The  soul  inhabiting  a  body  is 
known  to  have  three  states — wakefulness,  dream,  and  sleep.  The 
fourth  is  the  departure  from  the  body.  But  no  fifth  state  is 
known  to  exist  for  the  soul  either  in  the  Vedas  or  the  Smjtis. 
Therefore  unconsciousness  must  be  classed  under  one  of  the  four 
conditions. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  Of  these  states,  a 
man  in  a  swoon  cannot  be  in  the  waking  state;  for  he  does  not 
perceive  objects  through  his  senses. 

Opponent :  Well,  this  can  be  so  on  the  analogy  of  an  arrow- 
maker.  As  an  arrow-maker,  being  occupied  with  the  arrow, 
does  not  perceive  anything  but  the  arrow,  though  he  is  wide 
awake,  similarly  a  man  in  a  swoon,  though  still  awake,  does  not 


III. ii.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  607 

perceive  anything  else  because  his  mind  is  fully  overwhelmed  by 
the  pain  arising  from  a  blow  dealt  with  a  club  etc. 

Vedantin:  No,  since  he  behaves  as  one  having  no  conscious¬ 
ness  (at  the  time).  For  the  arrow-maker,  whose  attention  had 
been  fully  engaged,  says  afterwards,  “I  was  perceiving  simply 
the  arrow  so  long”.  But  the  unconscious  man  says  on  regaining 
his  consciousness,  “For  so  long  I  was  immersed  in  blinding 
darkness,  and  nothing  was  perceived  by  me.”  Besides,  a  waking 
man,  who  has  his  mind  concentrated  on  one  object,  holds  his 
body  erect,  whereas  the  body  of  an  unconscious  man  drops 
down  to  the  ground.  Therefore  neither  does  he  keep  awake  nor 
does  he  see  dreams,  for  he  has  no  consciousness  (i.e.  capacity  of 
perception).  Nor  is  he  dead,  for  he  has  life  and  warmth.  For 
when  a  man  faints,  people  having  doubts  as  to  whether  he  is 
dead  or  alive  feel  his  heart  to  ascertain  if  he  has  warmth;  and  to 
ascertain  if  he  breathes,  they  examine  his  nostrils.  Should  they 
fail  to  perceive  the  existence  of  both  breath  and  warmth,  they 
conclude  that  the  man  is  dead  and  so  carry  him  to  the  forest 
for  cremation.  On  the  contrary  if  they  feel  the  existence  of 
either  breath  or  warmth,  they  conclude  that  the  man  is  not 
dead,  and  so  they  resort  to  treatment  for  bringing  back  his 
consciousness.  Also  from  the  fact  that  the  unconscious  man  rises 
up  again,  it  follows  that  he  was  not  dead;  for  one  who  goes  to 
the  king  of  death,  never  comes  back  from  that  domain. 

Opponent :  Let  it  be  then  that  he  is  in  deep  sleep,  since  he 
has  no  consciousness  at  the  same  time  that  he  is  not  dead. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  there  is  a  difference.  A  man  in  a  swoon 
may  not  breathe  for  a  long  time,  but  his  body  may  be  in 
tremors  and  his  face  may  be  distorted  (with  a  look  of  terror), 
and  the  eyes  may  remain  wide  open.  But  a  man  in  deep  sleep 
has  a  calm  face,  he  breathes  rhythmically  again  and  again,  his 
eyes  remain  closed,  and  his  body  has  no  contortion.  A  sleeping 
man  is  awakened  simply  by  pushing  him  with  the  hand,  whereas 
an  unconscious  man  cannot  be  brought  back  to  consciousness 
even  by  beating  with  a  club.  Furthermore,  the  causes  of  swoon 
and  sleep  differ,  for  fainting  results  from  blows  from  a  club  etc., 
while  sleep  comes  as  a  result  of  fatigue.  And  people  never 
acknowledge  that  a  man  under  a  swoon  sleeps.  By  a  process  of 


608  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHAgYA  [III.  ii.  10 

elimination  we  realize  that  swooning  away  is  a  state  of  half 
sleep;  for  he  is  partially  asleep  owing  to  absence  of  consciousness, 
and  still  he  is  not  fully  asleep  as  his  state  is  different  from  sleep. 

Opponent :  How  again  can  a  swoon  be  described  as  a  partial 
sleep,  since  with  regard  to  the  sleeping  man  the  Upani$ads  say, 
“O  amiable  one,  he  then  becomes  unified  with  Existence”  (Ch. 
VI.  viii.  1),  “In  this  state  a  thief  is  no  thief”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  22), 
“Night  and  day  do  not  overflow  this  embankment  (i.e. 
Brahman),  nor  old  age,  nor  death,  nor  sorrow,  nor  merit,  nor 
demerit”  (Ch.  VIII.  iv.  1)?  For  an  individual  being  gets  the 
results  of  merit  and  demerit  through  the  generation  of  the  ideas 
of  his  being  happy  or  sorry;  but  neither  the  idea  of  happiness 
nor  of  misery  exists  in  sleep;  so  also  they  are  absent  in  a  swoon. 
Hence  it  follows  that  in  a  swoon,  as  in  sleep,  there  is  a  complete 
merger  in  Existence  owing  to  the  cessation  of  the  limiting 
adjuncts;  but  it  is  not  partial  merger. 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this  the  answer  is,  that  it  is  not  our 
view  that  in  a  swoon  a  man  becomes  half  merged  in  Brahman. 

What  do  you  say  then? 

A  swoon  is  partially  a  form  of  sleep,  and  partially  of  some 
other  state.  We  have  already  shown  its  similarity  and  dissimilar¬ 
ity  with  sleep.  And  it  is  a  door  to  death.  So  long  as  the  individ¬ 
ual’s  karma  lasts,  his  speech  and  mind  return  from  a  swoon;  but 
when  the  karma  has  no  residue,  his  breathing  and  warmth 
depart.  Hence  the  knowers  of  Brahman  call  swoon  a  partial 
sleep.  As  for  the  objection  raised  that  no  fifth  state  is  known  to 
exist,  that  is  nothing  damaging.  On  account  of  being  a  casual 
state,  it  is  not  so  widely  noted;  and  yet  it  is  well  recognized  in 
this  world  and  in  the  books  of  medicine.  By  admitting  it  to  be  a 
partial  sleep,  we  do  not  reckon  it  to  be  a  fifth  state.  In  this  way 
it  is  all  beyond  criticism. 

Topic  5:  The  Nature  of  Brahman 

?T  WRdVsfa  f|  HUH 

Not  gqpRT:  according  to  (difference  of)  place  (i.e.  limiting 
adjunct)  arfq-  even  (can  there  be)  J  a  twofold 

characteristic  of  the  supreme  Brahman  for  every¬ 
where  (It  is  taught  otherwise). 


III.  ii.  1 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  609 

11.  Not  even  according  to  place  can  Brahman  have  a  twofold 
characteristic ,  for  everywhere  (It  is  taught  to  be  without 
attributes). 

With  the  help  of  Upani$adic  texts,  the  nature  of  that  Brahman 
is  now  being  ascertained  with  which  the  individual  soul  becomes 
unified  in  sleep  when  its  limiting  adjuncts  become  quiescent. 
Vedic  texts  about  Brahman  are  met  with  which  are  indicative 
of  Brahman  both  with  qualification  and  without  qualification. 
Such  texts  as,  “He  is  the  doer  of  all  (good)  acts,  possessed  of 
all  (good)  desires,  all  (good)  smell,  all  (good)  tastes”  (Ch.  III. 
xiv.  2),  indicate  that  Brahman  has  attributes.  And  the  texts, 
“It  is  neither  gross,  nor  minute,  neither  short  nor  long”  (Bj\ 
III.  viii.  8)  and  others,  indicate  that  It  is  devoid  of  attributes. 

Doubt :  Now  should  it  be  understood  that  in  these  texts 
Brahman  is  spoken  of  as  possessed  of  a  twofold  characteristic, 
or  that  It  is  spoken  of  as  possessed  of  either  of  the  two 
characteristics?  Again,  even  if  one  of  these  characteristics  be 
true,  it  has  to  be  ascertained  whether  the  aspect  with  attributes 
is  to  be  accepted  or  the  aspect  without  attributes. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  on  the  authority  of  the  texts  presenting 
a  dual  aspect,  Brahman  must  have  both  the  aspects. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  As  to  that,  the 
supreme  Brahman,  considered  in  Itself,  cannot  logically  have 
both  the  characteristics;  for  it  cannot  be  admitted  that  the  very 
same  thing  is  naturally  possessed  of  attributes  like  form  etc.,  and 
that  it  is  also  without  these;  for  that  is  self-contradictory. 

Opponent :  Then  let  this  be  so  owing  to  position,  that  is  to 
say,  on  account  of  association  with  such  limiting  adjuncts  as 
earth. 

Veddntin :  That  too  is  not  logical.  For  even  by  association 
with  the  limiting  adjuncts  a  substance  that  is  different  in  kind 
cannot  change  its  nature  into  another;  for  a  transparent  crystal 
cannot  become  opaque  even  when  in  contact  with  limiting 
adjuncts  like  red  lac,  the  idea  of  opaqueness  being  a  mere  error. 
Moreover,  adjuncts  are  conjured  up  by  ignorance.  Hence,  even 
if  we  have  to  take  up  either  of  the  two  characteristics,  it  is  the 
Brahman  that  is  absolutely  attributeless  and  unchangeable  that 
39 


610  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  ii.  11 

has  to  be  accepted  and  not  the  opposite.  For  in  all  texts  which 
aim  at  presenting  the  real  nature  of  Brahman,  as  for  instance  in, 
“soundless,  touchless,  colourless,  undiminishing”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  IS), 
etc.,  Brahman  is  presented  as  devoid  of  all  distinguishing 
attributes. 


?r  sicfrwdWHiq  ii^ii 

Not  so  owing  to  differences”  if  it  be  argued 

thus,  (then)  ft  not  so,  because  of  the  negation  of 

such  differences  gcfo-q  individually." 

12.  If  it  be  argued  that  (Brahman  cannot  have  only  one 
characteristic) ,  on  account  of  differences  (met  with  in  the  scrip¬ 
tures),  (we  say  that)  it  is  not  so,  because  the  scriptures  negate 
each  of  these  differences  individually. 

Opponent :  It  may  still  be  argued  thus:  It  does  not  stand  to 
reason  to  assert,  as  it  has  been  done,  that  Brahman  is  beyond  all 
distinctions  and  has  but  one  characteristic,  and  that  It  cannot 
have  a  double  characteristic  either  naturally  or  owing  to  the 
influence  of  position. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  differences”.  For  the  aspects  of  Brahman  are 
taught  differently  in  connection  with  the  individual  meditations, 
as  for  instance,  “Brahman  has  four  feet  (or  quarters)”  (Ch.  III. 
xviii.  2),  “Brahman  has  sixteen  digits  (parts)”  (Pr.  VI.  1), 
“Brahman  is  the  bestower  of  the  results  of  actions  on  those 
persons”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  3),  “Brahman  has  the  three  worlds  as  Its 
body”  (Bj\  I.  iii.  22),  and  It  is  called  “VaiSvanara’  (Ch.  V. 
xii-xviii),  and  so  on.  Hence  Brahman  has  to  be  admitted  as 
possessed  of  attributes  as  well. 

Vedantin :  Did  we  not  say  that  it  is  not  possible  for  Brahman 
to  have  a  dual  characteristic? 

Opponent :  That  too  creates  no  difficulty,  because  a  difference 
in  aspects  is  created  by  limiting  adjuncts;  for  otherwise  the  texts 
talking  of  difference  will  be  left  without  any  scope. 

Ved&ntin :  We  say,  this  is  not  so. 

Why? 


III.  ii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  611 

“Because  the  scriptures  negate  each  of  these  differences 
individually.  “For  along  with  (the  mention  of)  each  difference 
created  by  a  limiting  adjunct,  the  scriptures  affirm  the  non¬ 
difference  alone  of  Brahman,  as  in,  “The  same  with  the  shining 
immortal  being  who  is  in  this  earth,  and  the  shining  immortal 
corporeal  being  in  the  body.  (These  four)  are  but  this  Self” 
etc.  (Br.  II.  v.  1).  Hence  the  difference  having  been  spoken  of 
for  the  sake  of  meditation,  and  non-difference  being  the  real 
purport  of  the  scriptures,  it  cannot  be  held  that  the  scriptures 
support  the  view  that  Brahman  is  possessed  of  diverse  aspects. 

arfq  11*311 

wfa  ^  Moreover,  some  (followers  of  some  branches)  tppj 
thus  (declare). 

13.  Moreover ,  the  followers  of  certain  branches  declare  thus. 

Moreover,  the  followers  of  certain  sections  declare  in  favour 
of  the  realization  of  non-duality  after  condemning  the  dualistic 
outlook,  as  in,  “This  is  to  be  attained  through  the  mind.  There 
is  no  diversity  whatsoever.  He  who  sees  as  though  there  is 
difference,  goes  from  death  to  death”  (Ka.  II.  i.  II).  Similarly 
others  have:  “After  deliberating  on  the  experiencer,  the  things 
experienced,  and  the  ordainer,  one  should  know  all  these  three 
to  be  but  the  Brahman  I  speak  of’  (Sv.  I.  12),  where  the  entire 
variety  of  phenomenal  manifestation,  consisting  of  the  objects 
of  experience,  the  experiencing  souls,  and  (God)  the  ordainer, 
is  declared  by  the  Upani$ad  to  be  none  other  than  Brahman  in 
essence. 

Opponent :  Since  two  classes  of  Upani$adic  texts,  speaking  of 
Brahman  as  with  form  and  also  as  without  form,  are  in  existence, 
how  can  it  be  asserted  that  Brahman  is  formless  alone? 

Vedantin :  Hence  comes  the  answer: 

1**11 

Formless  tr*  only  to  be  sure,  that  being 

the  dominant  note. 


612  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [lll.ii.14 

14.  Brahman  is  only  formless  to  be  sure ,  for  that  is  the 
dominant  note  (of  the  Upanifadic  teaching ). 

Brahman  is  surely  to  be  known  as  having  no  form  constituted 
by  colour  etc.,  and  not  as  having  it. 

Why? 

“For  that  is  the;  dominant  teaching”,  inasmuch  as  it  has  been 
established  under  the  aphorism,  “But  that  Brahman  is  known 
from  the  Upani$ads,  because  of  their  being  connected  with 
Brahman  as  their  main  import”  (I.  i.  4),  that  the  texts  like  the 
following  have  for  their  main  purport  the  transcendental 
Brahman  which  is  the  Self,  and  not  any  other  subject-matter: 
“It  is  neither  gross,  nor  minute,  neither  short  nor  long”  (Bj% 
III.  viii.  8),  “Soundless,  touchless,  colourless,  undiminishing” 
(Ka.  I.  iii.  15),  “That  which  is  known  as  Space  is  the  accom- 
plisher  of  name  and  form;  That  in  which  they  are  included  is 
Brahman”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1),  “Puru$a  is  transcendental,  since  He 
is  formless;  and  He  is  coextensive  with  all  that  is  external  and 
internal,  since  He  is  birthless”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  “That  Brahman 
is  without  prior  or  posterior,  without  interior  and  exterior.  The 
Self,  the  perceiver  of  everything,  is  Brahman”  (Bj*.  II.  v.  19), 
and  so  on.  Hence  in  sentences  of  this  kind,  the  formless  Brahman 
alone,  just  as  It  is  spoken  of  by  the  texts  themselves,  has  to  be 
accepted.  But  the  other  texts,  speaking  of  Brahman  with  form, 
have  the  injunctions  about  meditations  as  their  main  objectives. 
So  long  as  they  do  not  lead  to  some  contradiction,  their  apparent 
meanings  should  be  accepted.  But  when  they  involve  a  contra¬ 
diction,  the  principle  to  be  followed  for  deciding  one  or  the 
other  is  that,  those  that  have  the  formless  Brahman  as  their  main 
purport  are  more  authoritative  than  the  others  which  have  not 
that  as  their  main  purport.  It  is  according  to  this  that  one  is 
driven  to  the  conclusion  that  Brahman  is  formless  and  not  its 
opposite,  though  texts  having  both  the  purports  are  in  evidence. 

Opponent :  What  would  then  be  the  fate  of  the  texts  speaking 
of  forms? 

Vedantin :  Hence  comes  the  reply: 


III.  ii.  16]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  613 

*  And  (Brahman  can  have  appearances)  spflTCHRf 
ar-wmfcj  so  that  scriptures  may  not  be  rendered  purportless. 

15.  And  like  light ,  Brahman  can  (be  assumed  to)  have  different 
appearances ,  so  that  the  scriptures  may  not  become  purportless. 

Though  the  light  of  the  sun  or  moon  spreads  over  the  whole 
space,  still  when  it  comes  in  contact  with  adjuncts  like  fingers 
etc.,  it  seems  to  assume  the  forms,  straight  or  bent,  as  those 
adjuncts  may  have;  similarly  Brahman,  too,  seems  to  have  the 
forms  of  earth  etc.,  when  in  contact  with  those  things.  And  it 
is  nothing  contradictory  to  enjoin  meditations  on  Brahman 
based  on  those  forms.  Thus  the  sentences  presenting  Brahman 
as  having  forms  do  not  become  meaningless,  for  it  is  not  proper 
to  interpret  some  Vedic  sentences  as  having  meaning  and  the 
others  as  meaningless,  since  they  are  all  valid. 

Opponent:  Even  so,  does  not  the  assertion  made  earlier  that 
Brahman  cannot  have  a  dual  characteristic  even  in  association 
with  limiting  adjuncts,  stand  contradicted? 

Veddntin :  We  say,  no,  since  whatsoever  is  brought  about  by 
an  adjunct  is  not  the  essential  characteristic  of  a  thing,  since  the 
adjuncts  themselves  are  conjured  up  by  ignorance.  And  we  said 
in  the  respective  contexts  that  all  social  and  Vedic  behaviours 
crop  up  only  when  the  beginningless  nescience  is  taken  for 
granted. 


^  \\\\\\ 

^  And  (scripture)  arfif  declares  (Brahman  to  be) 
that  much  (i.e.  consciousness)  only. 

16.  The'Upanifad  also  declares  Brahman  to  be  Consciousness 
alone. 

The  Upani$ad  also  says  that  Brahman  is  pure  consciousness, 
devoid  of  other  aspects  contrary  to  this,  and  without  any  distin¬ 
guishing  feature,  as  in,  “As  a  lump  of  salt  is  without  interior  or 
exterior,  entire,  and  purely  saline  in  taste,  even  so  is  the  Self 


614  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [HI.  ii.  16 

without  interior  or  exterior,  entire,  and  pure  Intelligence  alone” 
(Bf.  IV.  v.  13),  which  means  that  the  Self  has  no  internal  or 
external  aspect  apart  from  pure  consciousness,  Its  nature  being 
mere  impartite  consciousness  without  any  interstices.  Just  as  a 
lump  of  salt  has  the  saline  taste  alone  both  inside  and  outside, 
and  no  other  taste,  so  also  is  this  Self. 

^  3rfq  wfa  ll*V9|| 

*  Moreover  qtfqfr  (Vedic  text)  reveals  spft  likewise  fjpft 
it  is  mentioned  in  the  Snyti  srfq  as  weU. 

17.  Moreover ;  the  Vedas  reveal  this;  likewise  this  is  mentioned 
in  the  Smrtis  also. 

Moreover,  the  Vedas  reveal  through  a  negation  of  other 
aspects  that  Brahman  has  no  distinguishing  feature,  as  for 
instance  in,  “Now  therefore  the  description  (of  Brahman):  ‘Not 
this,  not  this’  ”  (Bf.  II.  iii.  6),  “That  (Brahman)  is  surely 
different  from  the  known;  and,  again,  It  is  above  the  unknown” 
(Ke.  I.  4),  “That  Bliss  of  Brahman,  failing  to  reach  which,  words 
turn  back  along  with  the  mind”  (Tai.  II.  ix.  1),  and  so  on.  And 
it  is  also  known  from  the  Vedic  texts  that  Badhva  being  asked 
by  Ba$kali,  replied  merely  by  not  uttering  a  word,  as  stated 
in,  “He  (Ba$kali)  said,  ‘Teach  me  Brahman,  sir.’  He  (Badhva) 
became  silent.  When  the  question  was  repeated  a  second  and  a 
third  time  he  said,  ‘I  have  already  spoken,  but  you  cannot 
comprehend.  That  Self  is  Quiescence’  ”.  Similarly  in  the  Smrtis, 
the  instruction  is  given  through  a  negation  of  other  things,  as 
in,  “I  shall  tell  you  of  that  which  is  to  be  known  and  by  know¬ 
ing  which  one  attains  immortality.  The  supreme  Brahman  is 
without  any  beginning.  It  can  neither  be  called  gross  (visible) 
nor  fine  (invisible)”  (Gita,  XIII.  12),  and  so  on.  Similarly  the 
Smrti  mentions  how  Narayapa  in  His  cosmic  form  said  to 
Narada,  “O  Narada,  that  you  see  me  as  possessed  of  all  the  (five 
divine)  qualities  of  all  elements,  is  only  because  of  My  Maya, 
called  up  by  Myself.  For  else  you  should  not  understand  Me 
thus.” 


III.  il.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  615 

3m  tTR  ^Wlfe^  11**11 

3RT:  it^  Hence  also  rrrt  the  illustration  ^R*>-snfR-R^  like 
the  reflection  of  the  sun  etc. 

18.  Hence  also  are  the  illustrations  of  the  sun's  reflection  etc. 

Since  this  Self  is  by  nature  Consciousness  Itself,  distinctionless, 
beyond  speech  and  mind,  and  can  be  taught  by  way  of  negating 
other  things,  hence  in  the  scriptures  dealing  with  liberation  an 
illustration  is  cited  by  saying  that  it  is  “like  the  sun  reflected 
in  water”.  Here  the  aspect  kept  in  view  is  the  one  with  attri¬ 
butes,  which  is  not  real  and  which  is  created  by  limiting  adjuncts, 
as  it  is  done  in  such  texts,  “As  this  luminous  sun,  though  one  in 
itself,  becomes  multifarious  owing  to  its  entry  into  water  divided 
by  different  pots,  similarly  this  Deity,  the  birthless  self-effulgent 
Self,  though  one,  seems  to  be  diversified  owing  to  Its  entry  into 
the  different  bodies,  constituting  Its  limiting  adjuncts.”  Similarly, 
“Being  but  one,  the  Universal  Soul  is  present  in  all  beings. 
Though  one,  It  is  seen  as  many,  like  the  moon  in  water" 
(Amrtabindu,  12)  and  other  texts. 

Here  the  opponent  raises  his  head: 

II  $$.11 

g  But  8TH|-R^-3T<i^urr^  as  nothing  is  perceived  to  be  similar 
to  water  that  kind  of  parallelism  r  (does)  not  (apply). 

19.  But  that  kind  of  parallelism  is  inapplicable  as  nothing  is 
perceived  to  be  similar  to  water. 

The  comparison  with  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  water  cannot 
be  reasonably  upheld  here  (in  the  case  of  the  Self),  since  nothing 
like  that  is  perceived  (here).  A  material  thing,  such  as  water, 
is  seen  to  be  clearly  separate  from  and  remotely  placed  from 
the  sun  etc.  which  are  themselves  material  entities  (with  forms). 
There  it  is  proper  that  an  image  of  the  sun  should  be  formed. 
But  the  Self  is  not  such  a  material  entity  (having  form);  and 
since  It  is  all-pervasive  and  non-different  from  all,  It  can  have 


616  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  19 

no  limiting  adjuncts  either  separate  or  remote  from  It.  Hence 
this  illustration  is  inapt. 

Vedantin :  The  objection  is  being  remedied: 

ir°ii 

There  is  a  participation  in  increase  and 
decrease  gRT:-qT3Tq  on  account  of  the  entry  (immanence): 

on  account  of  the  propriety  of  both  (the 
illustration  and  the  thing  illustrated)  in  this  way,  (there 

can  be  no  contradiction). 

20.  Since  Brahman  has  entered  into  the  limiting  adjuncts,  It 
seems  to  participate  in  their  increase  and  decrease .  The  illustra¬ 
tion  is  apt  since  the  illustration  and  thing  illustrated  have 
propriety  from  this  point  of  view. 

On  the  contrary,  this  illustratic  is  quite  apt,  inasmuch  as  the 
point  sought  to  be  illustrated  is  pertinent.  For  as  between  the 
illustration  and  the  thing  illustrated,  nobody  can  show  equality 
in  every  respect  over  and  above  some  point  of  similarity  in  some 
way,  which  is  sought  to  be  presented.  For  if  such  an  all-round 
similarity  exists,  the  very  relation  between  the  illustration  and 
the  thing  illustrated  will  fall  through.  Moreover,  this  illustra¬ 
tion  of  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  water  is  not  cooked  up  by 
anybody’s  imagination.  But  this  illustration  having  been  already 
cited  in  the  scripture,  its  applicability  alone  is  being  pointed  out 
here. 

Where,  again,  is  the  intended  point  of  similarity? 

The  reply  is  this:  “A  participation  in  increase  and  decrease”, 
inasmuch  as  the  reflection  of  the  sun  in  water  increases  with  the 
increase  of  water,  and  decreases  with  its  reduction,  it  moves 
when  the  water  moves,  and  it  differs  as  the  water  differs.  Thus 
the  sun  conforms  to  the  characteristics  of  the  water;  but  in 
reality  the  sun  never  has  these.  Thus  also  from  the  highest  point 
of  view.  Brahman,  while  remaining  unchanged  and  retaining  Its 
sameness,  seems  to  conform  to  such  characteristics  as  increase 
and  decrease  of  the  limiting  adjunct  (body),  owing  to  Its  entry 
into  such  an  adjunct  as  the  body.  Thus  since  the  illustration  and 


III.  ii.  21  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  617 

the  thing  illustrated  are  both  compatible,  there  is  no  contradic¬ 
tion. 


IRUI 

21.  And  (this  is  also)  in  accordance  with  (the  Vedic)  revela¬ 
tion. 

The  Upani$ads  also  show  that  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself  has 
entered  into  the  limiting  adjuncts,  such  as  the  bodies  and  the 
rest,  as  in,  “He  made  bodies  with  two  feet  and  bodies  with  four 
feet.  That  supreme  Being  first  entered  the  bodies  as  a  bird  (i.e. 
the  subtle  body)”  (Bj*.  II.  v.  18),  as  also,  “Myself  entering  as 
this  individual  Self”  (Ch.  VI.  iii.  2).  Therefore  it  has  been  aptly 
said,  “Hence  also  are  the  illustrations  like  the  sun’s  reflections 
etc.”  (III.  ii.  18).  Accordingly,  the  conclusion  is  that  Brahman 
is  without  any  distinguishing  feature,  and  has  but  one  aspect, 
and  not  two  or  an  opposite  one. 

Some  people  (i.e.  pseudo-V eddntins)  fancy  here  two  topics. 
The  first  topic  is  concerned  with  whether  Brahman  has  but  one 
characteristic,  devoid  of  all  the  variety  of  phenomenal  manifesta¬ 
tions,  or  It  has  many  features  just  like  the  universe.  It  being 
established  that  Brahman  is  devoid  of  the  variety  of  manifesta¬ 
tions  (B.  S.  III.  ii.  11-14),  the  second  topic  (B.  S.  III.  ii.  15-21) 
considers  whether  Brahman  has  the  characteristic  of  existence 
or  consciousness  or  both. 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this  we  say:  Considered  from  every 
point  of  view,  it  is  useless  to  start  a  fresh  topic.  If  the  effort 
made  here  is  meant  merely  for  refuting  a  multiplicity  in  the 
characteristics  of  Brahman,  that  has  already  been  done  under 
the  topic  starting  with,  “Not  even  according  to  place  can 
Brahman  have  a  twofold  characteristic”  (III.  ii.  11),  so  that  the 
succeeding  topic,  starting  with,  “And  possessed  of  conscious¬ 
ness”  etc.  (III.  ii.  15)  will  be  uncalled  for.  Furthermore,  it 
cannot  be  held  that  Brahman  has  merely  the  characteristic  of 
existence  and  not  consciousness;  for  that  would  set  at  naught 
such  texts  as  “impartite  Consciousness  to  be  sure”  (Bf.  IV.  v. 
13).  And  how  can  a  Brahman  bereft  of  consciousness  be  taught 
(by  the  scripture)  as  the  Self  of  a  sentient  individual  being?  It 


618  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  ii.  21 

cannot  also  be  said  that  Brahman  is  characterized  by  conscious¬ 
ness  only,  but  not  by  existence;  for  that  would  nullify  the 
Upani$adic  texts  like,  “The  Self  is  to  be  realized  as  existing” 
(Ka.  II.  iii.  13).  How,  again,  can  a  consciousness  that  has  no 
existence  be  conceived  of?  It  cannot  also  be  argued  that  the 
second  topic  proves  that  Brahman  has  a  dual  characteristic,  since 
that  would  contradict  what  was  accepted  (by  you)  earlier.  And 
if  Brahman  be  asserted  either  to  be  characterized  by  conscious¬ 
ness  devoid  of  existence  or  by  existence  devoid  of  consciousness, 
it  will  lead  to  Brahman’s  becoming  dowered  with  a  variety  of 
manifestations,  a  position  already  refuted  under  the  previous 
topic. 

Opponent :  That  is  nothing  harmful  inasmuch  as  the  Vedic 
texts  declare  this. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  the  same  entity  cannot  have  many 
natures. 

Again,  even  if  it  be  contended  that  existence  itself  is  the  same 
as  consciousness,  as  also  that  consciousness  itself  is  existence,  so 
that  the  one  does  not  rule  out  the  other,  still  the  alternative 
positions  taken  up,  viz  whether  Brahman  is  characterized  by 
existence,  or  by  consciousness,  or  by  both,  have  no  ground  to 
stand  on. 

As  for  ourselves  we  have  grouped  the  aphorisms  under  the 
very  same  topic. 

Moreover,  it  was  seen  that  if  on  finding  that  the  Vedic  texts, 
while  speaking  of  Brahman,  present  It  as  both  with  and  without 
form,  and  thus  land  themselves  into  self-contradiction,  one 
understands  them  as  revealing  only  the  formless  Brahman,  then 
one  has  to  provide  perforce  a  scope  for  the  rest  of  the  texts. 
The  aphorisms  starting  with,  “And  like  light  taking  the  forms 
of  objects”  (III.  ii.  15),  become  more  purposeful  as  finding  out 
that  scope. 

As  for  the  view  that  even  the  Vedic  texts  speaking  of 
Brahman’s  forms  are  meant  merely  for  leading  to  the  formless 
Brahman  through  a  sublation  of  the  manifested  universe,  but 
that  they  have  no  independent  purpose,  it  may  be  said  that  that, 
too,  does  not  appear  to  be  proper. 

Why? 


III.  ii.  21  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  619 

Some  of  the  manifestations  that  are  spoken  of  in  a  context  of 
the  supreme  knowledge,  as  in,  “For  to  Him  are  yoked  ten 
organs,  nay  hundreds  of  them.  He  is  the  organs;  He  is  ten,  and 
thousands — many,  and  infinite”  (Bj\  II.  v.  19),  etc.  may  be 
admitted  to  be  meant  for  sublation,  since  the  conclusion  is  made 
with,  “That  Brahman  is  without  prior  or  posterior,  without 
interior  or  exterior”  (ibid.).  But  the  manifestations  revealed  in 
a  context  of  meditation,  as  in  “Identified  with  the  mind,  having 
Fritya  as  his  body,  and  effulgence  itself  by  nature”  (Ch.  III.  xiv. 
2),  and  so  on,  cannot  reasonably  be  held  to  be  meant  for  subla¬ 
tion;  for  they  are  connected  with  some  injunction  for  meditation 
forming  the  subject-matter  of  the  context,  as  for  instance,  “He 
should  make  a  resolve”  (ibid.).  And  when  the  text  itself  presents 
these  attributes  as  meant  for  meditation,  it  is  not  proper  to 
interpret  them  figuratively  as  meant  for  sublation.  Furthermore,, 
if  all  manifestations  are  equally  meant  for  sublation,  the  state¬ 
ment  (in  the  aphorism),  “Brahman  is  only  formless  to  be  sure, 
because  that  is  the  dominant  note  of  the  Upani$ads”  (III.  ii.  14), 
where  the  reason  for  accepting  one  of  the  alternatives  is 
presented,  will  have  no  ground  for  its  presentation.  Besides,  the 
results  of  these  meditations  are  surely  known  from  the  instruc¬ 
tions  as  being  sometimes  attenuation  of  sins,  sometimes  getting 
divine  powers,  and  sometimes  emancipation  by  stages.  Hence  it 
is  proper  that  the  texts  about  meditations  and  about  Brahman 
sho.uld  have  different  purposes  in  view,  and  it  is  not  proper  to 
reduce  them  to  the  very  same  idea.  Moreover,  (if  they  convey 
a  single  idea)  it  has  to  be  shown  how  that  sameness  of.  idea  can 
be  arrived  at. 

Opponent:  Since  they  appear  to  be  connected  with  a  single 
injunction,8  they  have  to  be  combined  like  the  injunctions  about 
the  (main)  DarSa-purgamasa  and  (subsidiary)  Prayaja  sacrifices. 

Veddntin :  No,  for  there  is  no  injunction  in  texts  about 
Brahman.  It  was  elaborately  proved  under  the  aphorism,  “But 
that  Brahman  is  known  from  the  Upani$ads,  because  of  their 
becoming  connected  with  That  as  their  main  import”  (I.  i.  4), 
how  the  texts  about  Brahman  have  only  the  knowledge  of  the 


•About  the  sublation  of  the  universe  by  one  who  wants  illumination. 


620  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [HI.ii.21 

(pre-existing)  thing  itself  as  their  purport,  but  they  are  not 
meant  for  enjoining  any  action.  Again,  it  has  to  be  shown  what 
(kind  of  activity)  the  injunction  here  should  be  concerned 
with;  for  a  man,  when  he  is  being  employed  in  some  duty,  is 
directed  with  the  order,  “Do”,  with  regard  to  the  duty  he  has 
to  perform. 

Opponent :  The  sublation  of  all  the  variety  of  manifestations 
within  duality  will  be  the  object  of  the  injunction.  Since  the 
realization  of  the  reality  that  is  Brahman  is  not  achieved  so  long 
as  the  dual  world  of  manifestations  is  not  sublated,  therefore, 
the  world  of  manifestations,  that  is  opposed  to  the  realization  of 
the  reality  that  Brahman  is,  stands  there  as  a  thing  to  be  sublated. 
As  a  sacrifice  is  enjoined  as  a  duty  for  one  who  hankers  after 
heaven,  so  the  sublation  of  the  world  of  manifestations  is 
enjoined  for  one  who  wants  liberation.  And  as  darkness,  stand¬ 
ing  as  an  obstruction  to  the  perception  of  a  vessel  etc.  covered 
with  darkness,  is  removed  by  one  who  wants  to  know  the  vessel 
etc.,  so  the  world  of  manifestations  standing  opposed  to  the 
realization  of  Brahman  has  to  be  sublated  by  one  who  wants  to 
realize  Brahman;  for  this  phenomenal  universe  of  manifestations 
has  Brahman  as  its  essence  and  not  that  Brahman  has  the  phenom¬ 
enal  manifestations  as  Its  essence.  Hence  the  reality  that 
Brahman  is  has  to  be  realized  through  a  sublation  of  name  and 
form. 

Ved&ntin :  Here  our  question  is:  What  is  meant  by  this  subla¬ 
tion  of  the  universe  of  manifestations?  Is  the  world  to  be 
annihilated  like  the  destruction  of  the  solidity  of  ghee  by  contact 
with  fire;  or  is  it  that  the  world  of  name  and  form,  created  in 
Brahman  by  nescience  like  many  moons  created  in  the  moon  by 
the  eye-disease  called  timira,  has  to  be  destroyed  through 
knowledge?  Now  if  it  be  said  that  this  existing  universe  of 
manifestations,  consisting  of  the  body  etc.  on  the  corporeal 
plane  and  externally  of  the  earth  etc.,  is  to  be  annihilated,  that 
is  a  task  impossible  for  any  man,  and  hence  the  instruction  about 
its  extirpation  is  meaningless.  Moreover,  (even  supposing  that 
such  a  thing  is  possible,  then)  the  universe,  including  the  earth 
etc.,  having  been  annihilated  by  the  first  man  who  got  liberation, 
the  present  universe  should  have  been  devoid  of  the  earth  etc. 


III.  ii.  21]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  621 

Again,  if  it  be  said  that  this  universe  of  manifestations  super¬ 
imposed  on  the  one  Brahman  alone  through  ignorance  has  to 
be  sublated  by  enlightenment,  then  it  is  Brahman  Itself  that  has 
to  be  presented  through  a  denial  of  the  manifestation  super¬ 
imposed  by  ignorance  by  saying,  “Brahman  is  one  without  a 
second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1),  “That  is  Truth,  That  is  the  Self,  That 
thou  art  (O  Svetaketu)”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7-16).  When  Brahman  is 
taught  thus,  knowledge  dawns  automatically,  and  by  that 
knowledge  ignorance  is  removed.  As  a  result  of  that,  this  ^hole 
manifestation  of  name  and  form,  superimposed  by  ignorance, 
vanishes  away  like  things  seen  in  a  dream.  But  unless  Brahman 
is  (first)  taught  (by  scripture  etc.),  neither  does  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman  dawn  nor  is  the  universe  sublated  even  though  the 
instruction,  “Know  Brahman,  sublate  the  world”,  be  imparted 
a  hundred  times. 

Opponent :  After  Brahman  has  been  taught,  the  injunction 
may  relate  either  to  the  act  of  knowing  Brahman  or  to  the  act 
of  sublating  the  universe. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  both  these  objects  will  be  fulfilled  from 
the  very  instruction  that  Brahman  that  is  free  from  the  universe 
of  manifestations  is  one’s  Self.  For  from  the  very  revelation  of 
the  nature  of  the  rope,  mistaken  as  a  snake,  follows  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  its  real  nature,  as  also  the  removal  of  the  manifestation 
of  snake  etc.  on  it  brought  about  by  superimposition  through 
ignorance.  It  cannot  be  that  a  thing  already  achieved  has  to  be 
done  over  again.  Moreover,  the  individual  being,  that  is  kfiown 
during  the  state  of  phenomenal  manifestation  as  the  person 
to  be  directed  by  the  scriptures,  must  either  belong  to  the 
world  of  manifestations  or  to  Brahman.  On  the  first  supposi¬ 
tion,  when  Brahman  is  taught  as  devoid  of  phenomenal  manifesta¬ 
tions,  the  individual  also  becomes  negated  along  with  the  earth 
etc.;  and  so  with  regard  to  whom  would  you  talk  of  an  injunc¬ 
tion  for  the  sublation  of  the  universe;  and  of  whom  would  you 
assert  that  he  is  to  achieve  liberation  following  the  injunction? 
On  the  second  supposition,  when  Brahman  is  taught  by  saying 
that  the  real  nature  of  the  individual  being  is  Brahman  Itself 
which  is  by  nature  beyond  all  injunctions  and  that  (the  soul’s) 
individuality  is  a  creation  of  ignorance,  then  from  that  will 


622  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  21 

follow  a  cessation  of  all  injunctions,  since  there  will  be  none 
towards  whom  injunction  can  be  directed.  As  for  expressions 
like  “(The  Self)  is  to  be  seen”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  5),  which  are  met 
with  in  the  context  of  the  supreme  knowledge,  they  are  meant 
mainly  for  attracting  one’s  mind  towards  Reality,  but  do  not 
aim  mainly  at  enjoining  any  injunction  about  the  knowledge  of 
Reality.  In  ordinary  parlance  also,  when  such  directive  sentences 
as,  “Look  at  this”,  “Lend  ear  to  that”,  etc.  are  uttered,  all  that  is 
meant  is,  “Be  attentive  to  these”,  but  not,  “Acquire  this  know¬ 
ledge  directly”.  And  a  man,  who  is  in  the  presence  of  an  object 
to  be  known,  may  sometimes  know  it,  and  sometimes  not.  Hence 
a  man  who  wants  to  impart  the  knowledge  of  the  thing  has  to 
draw  his  attention  to  the  object  of  knowledge  itself.  When  that 
is  done,  the  knowledge  arises  naturally  in  conformity  with  the 
object  and  the  means  of  knowledge.  It  is  not  a  fact  that  any 
knowledge  (of  a  given  thing),  contrary  to  what  is  well  known 
through  other  means  of  valid  knowledge,  can  arise  in  a  man 
even  when  acting  under  some  direction.  And  should  the  man, 
under  the  belief,  “I  am  directed  to  know  this  in  such  a  way”, 
know  it  otherwise,  this  cannot  be  true  knowledge. 

What  is  it  then? 

It  is  a  mental  act  (i.e.  deliberate  fancy).  But  (apart  from 
injunction),  if  it  should  arise  otherwise  by  itself,  it  will  merely 
be  an  error.  Knowledge  arises,  however,  from  its  valid  means 
(like  perception  etc.),  and  it  conforms  to  its  object,  just  as  it 
is.  It  can  neither  be  produced  by  a  hundred  injunctions,  nor 
debarred  by  a  hundred  prohibitions.  For  it  is  not  a  matter  of 
personal  option,  it  being  dependent  on  the  object  itself.  For 
this  reason  also  there  is  no  scope  for  injunction  (about 
Brahman).  Moreover,  if  it  be  asserted  that  the  whole  scope  of 
the  scripture  consists  in  nothing  more  than  its  adherence  to 
injunction  alone,  then  the  position  taken  up  earlier  that  the 
individual  soul  is  one  with  Brahman  which  is  beyond  all 
injunction,  becomes  invalidated.  Again,  if  it  be  held  that  the 
scripture  itself  speaks  of  the  soul’s  unity  with  the  Brahman  that 
is  beyond  injunction,  and  it  also  enjoins  a  man  to  know  that 
unity,  then  the  very  same  scripture  about  Brahman  will  be  open 
to  the  charge  of  duplicity  or  self-contradiction.  Again,  on  the 


III.  u.  22]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  623 

assumption  that  the  scriptures  are  concerned  with  injunction 
alone,  no  one  can  avoid  such  defects  as  the  rejection  of  what  is 
heard  in  the  scriptures  and  imagination  of  what  is  not  heard, 
and  the  defect  of  liberation  becoming  a  result  of  the  unseen 
potency  of  work  and  hence  impermanent  like  the  results  of 
rites  and  sacrifices.  Hence  the  texts  about  Brahman  have  enlight¬ 
enment  alone  as  their  goal,  and  they  are  not  concerned  with 
injunction.  Accordingly,  it  is  wrong  to  argue  that  they  impart  a 
single  idea  (about  Brahman),  since  they  come  within  the  scope 
of  a  single  injunction.  Even  if  the  existence  of  injunction  be 
presumed  in  the  case  of  the  texts  speaking  of  Brahman,  still  it 
remains  unproved  that  the  very  same  injunction  is  present  in  the 
instructions  about  the  conditioned  Brahman  and  unconditioned 
Brahman.  For  when  through  such  proofs  as  the  use  of  different 
words,  a  difference  of  injunctions  becomes  palpable,  it  is  not 
possible  to  resort  to  the  plea  that  the  same  injunction  exists 
everywhere.  As  for  the  texts  about  the  Prayaja  and  DarSa- 
punjamasa,  it  is  proper  to  accept  their  unity,  since  the  portion 
dealing  with  the  competence  (of  their  performer)  is  the  same. 
But  here  as  regards  the  injunctions  about  the  qualified  and 
unqualified  Brahman,  no  such  section  of  the  text  is  available 
that  declares  the  sameness  of  the  qualification  of  the  man  seeking 
for  them.  For  such  attributes  as  “effulgence  itself  by  nature” 
are  not  conducive  to  the  sublation  of  the  universe  of  manifesta¬ 
tion,  nor  is  the  sublation  of  the  universe  helpful  to  such  qualities 
as  “effulgence  itself  by  nature”.;  for  they  are  mutually  contra¬ 
dictory.  It  is  not  logical  to  accommodate  in  one  and  the  same 
substratum  such  attributes  as  the  sublation  of  all,  and  the 
persistence  of  a  part  of  the  phenomenal  manifestations.  There¬ 
fore  the  division  made  by  us  of  the  (separate)  instructions  about 
Brahman  with  form  and  without  form  is  more  reasonable. 

Topic  6:  Unconditioned  Brahman  and  Soul 

MfcddMxtf  f?  Mfd*fafd  dfft  ^  IR^II 

The  Upani$ad  gfafrrfa  denies  Sffir-qdHV*  the  limitation 
that  is  under  discussion  fg  certainly;  ^  and  speaks  ijq; 

something  more  after  that  (negation). 


624  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [HI.  ii.  22 

22.  The  Upanifad  certainly  denies  the  limitation  that  is  being 
dealt  with  and  then  speaks  of  something  more. 

The  Upani$ad  starts  with  the  text,  “Brahman  has  but  two 
forms — gross  and  subtle,  mortal  and  immortal,  limited  and 
unlimited,  and  defined  and  undefined”  (Bf.  II.  iii.  1).  Then 
having  divided  the  five  great  (subtle)  elements  under  two 
heads,4  and  having  revealed  such  aspects  as  the  possession  of  the 
colour  of  the  turmeric  by  that  essence  of  the  subtle  form,  called 
the  infinite  Being  (Puru$a),5  the  text  again  goes  on,  “Now 
therefore  the  description  (of  Brahman):  Not  so,  not  so. 
Because  there  is  no  other  and  more  appropriate  description  than 
this  ‘Not  so’”  (Bf.  II.  iii.  6).  Now  we  ask,  against  what  is  this 
negation  directed?  For  nothing  is  perceived  here  as  having  been 
pointed  out  by  saying,  “This  is  that”,  which  can  constitute  the 
object  of  negation.  But  the  use  of  the  word  “so”  seems  to 
indicate  that  something  has  been  presented  here  as  the  object  of 
negation.  For  in  the  text,  “Not  so,  not  so”,  the  word  “so”  is 
used  after  the  word  “not”;  and  “so”,  usually  used  in  connection 
with  something  proximate,  is  seen  to  be  applied  in  the  same 
way  as  “this”,  as  for  instance  in  such  expressions  as,  “So  has 
the  teacher  said”.  And  the  things  we  get  near  at  hand  here 
from  the  force  of  the  context  are  the  two  forms  of  Brahman 
together  with  their  ramifications.  And  Brahman  is  that  which 
has  the  two  forms. 

Doubt :  That  being  the  position,  the  doubt  arises  in  us:  Does 
this  negation  deny  the  forms  as  well  as  the  possessor  of  forms, 
or  only  one  of  them?  Again,  if  either  of  the  two  is  denied,  then 
whether  Brahman  is  denied  keeping  intact  the  forms,  or  are  the 
forms  denied,  retaining  Brahman? 

Opponent :  That  being  so,  and  both  being  the  subject-matters 
under  discussion,  we  apprehend  that  both  are  negated.  Besides, 
we  have  here  two  negations,  the  phrase  “not  so”  being  used 
twice,  from  which  fact  the  idea  arises  that  by  one  of  them  the 
form  of  Brahman  consisting  of  the  phenomenal  manifestations 

4  (1)  Gross — earth,  water,  fire;  (2)  fine — air,  space. 

5  Hiranyagarbha,  the  Being  in  the  sun  and  the  right  eye,  and  identifying 
Himself  with  the  organs,  i.e.  the  subtle  body,  known  otherwise  as  Prana . 


III.ii.22]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  625 

is  denied,  and  by  the  other  is  denied  Brahman,  the  possessor  of 
the  form.  Or  it  may  be  that  Brahman  Itself,  of  which  the  two 
forms  are  the  two  aspects,  is  denied;  for  being  beyond  speech 
and  mind,  the  existence  of  that  Brahman  cannot  be  conceived 
of,  and  hence  It  is  a  fit  object  of  denial;  but  the  phenomenal 
expressions  are  not  fit  to  be  denied  as  they  come  within  the  range 
of  perception  etc.  The  repetition  (of  “not  so”)  is  meant  to  show 
earnestness  (or  generation  of  conviction). 

Vedantin :  In  reply  to  this  we  say  that  so  far  as  these  alterna¬ 
tives  go,  the  denial  of  both  cannot  be  reasonable,  for  that  would 
lead  to  nihilism.  Something  unreal  is  denied  on  the  basis  of 
something  real,  as  for  instance  a  snake  etc.  on  a  rope  etc.  And 
that  is  possible  only  if  some  positive  entity  is  left  over  (after 
the  denial).  For  should  everything  be  denied,  what  other 
positive  substratum  will  be  left  over?  And  unless  something  else 
outlives  the  denial,  the  thing  sought  to  be  denied,  cannot  be 
negated;  and  hence  the  latter  thus  becomes  a  reality,  so  that 
the  contemplated  denial  itself  becomes  impossible.  Besides,  the 
denial  of  Brahman  is  not  reasonable,  for  that  would  contradict 
the  introduction  made  with,  “I  will  tell  you  of  Brahman”  (Bf. 
III.  i.  1),  as  also  the  condemnation  contained  in  such  texts  as,  “If 
anyone  knows  Brahman  as  non-existent,  he  himself  becomes 
non-existent”  (Tai.  II.  vi.  1),  and  the  affirmation  made  in,  “The 
Self  is  to  be  realized  as  existing”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  13).  That  would 
also  lead  to  overriding  all  the  Upani$ads.  As  for  the  statement 
that  Brahman  is  beyond  speech  and  mind,  that  is  not  meant  to 
imply  that  Brahman  is  non-existent.  For  it  is  not  logical  to  deny 
that  very  Brahman  after  establishing  It  with  a  great  show  of 
girding  up  one’s  loins,  in  such  sentences  of  the  Upani$ads  as, 
“The  knower  of  Brahman  attains  the  highest”,  “Brahman  is 
Truth,  Knowledge,  Infinity”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1);  for  as  the  popular 
saying  has  it,  “Rather  than  wash  away  the  mud,  it  is  much 
better  to  avoid  its  touch  from  a  distance”.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
the  text  “Failing  to  reach  which,  words  turn  back  with  the 
mind”  (Tai.  II.  ix.  1),  presents  only  a  process  of  propounding 
Brahman.  The  idea  expressed  is  this:  Brahman  is  beyond  speech 
and  mind;  It  cannot  be  classed  with  objects  of  knowledge;  It  is 
one’s  inmost  Self;  and  It  is  by  nature  eternal,  pure,  intelligent, 
40 


626  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.ii.22 

and  free.  Hence  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  phenomenal 
expression  alone  of  Brahman  is  denied,  and  Brahman  Itself  is  left 
over.  That  very  fact  is  stated  in  the  aphorism,  “The  Upani§ad 
certainly  denies  the  limitation  that  is  being  dealt  with”  etc. 
The  word  “so”  (iti)  denies  only  that  which  is  the  topic  under 
consideration,  viz  the  forms  of  Brahman  characterized  as  gross 
and  subtle,  which  are  definable  as  “this  much”,  that  is  to  say, 
which  are  limited.  For  these  are  the  things  under  discussion  and 
have  been  elaborated  in  the  earlier  texts  under  the  headings 
divine  and  corporeal.  And  there  is  the  other  form  growing  out 
of  this  one.  It  consists  of  desires;  it  is  constituted  by  the  essence 
of  the  subtle  aspect;  it  is  referred  to  by  the  word  Puru$a;  it 
subsists  in  the  form  of  the  subtle  body;  and  it  is  shown  with 
the  help  of  the  illustration  of  turmeric  etc.  For  the  subtle  body, 
formed  of  the  quintessence  of  the  fine  elements,  cannot  have  a 
visible  form.  Thus  it  is  understood  that  by  the  word  “so”  (iti), 
indicative  of  something  near  at  hand,  these  very  aspects  of 
Brahman,  consisting  of  phenomenal  expression,  are  placed  in 
apposition  with  “not”,  the  word  of  denial.  As  for  “Brahman”, 
It  is  presented  in  the  earlier  text,  with  the  sixth  (genitive)  case¬ 
ending,  as  a  word  qualifying  “form”  (in  Brahmanah  rupam — 
Brahman’s  form),  but  It  is  not  presented  in  Its  own  right  (as 
the  subject  of  the  sentence).  And  when  after  the  two  forms  of 
Brahman  have  been  elaborated,  the  curiosity  arises  to  know  the 
nature  of  the  possessor  of  the  forms,  then  commences  the  text 
with  “Not  so,  not  so”  (Bj\  II.  iii.  6).  From  this  it  is  ascertained 
that  the  underlying  assumption  in  this  text  is  that  the  denial  of 
the  forms  is  tantamount  to  a  presentation  of  the  true  nature  of 
Brahman;  for  all  creation,  based  on  that  Brahman,  is  denied  to 
be  true  by  saying  “Not  so,  not  so”.  And  it  is  but  proper  that 
all  creation  should  be  denied  by  saying  “Not  so,  not  so”,  since 
from  such  Upani$adic  phrases  as  “originating  only  in  name” 
(Ch.  VI.  i.  4)  creation  is  known  to  be  unreal;  but  not  so  can 
Brahman  be  denied,  since  It  is  the  basis  of  all  phenomena.  And 
the  misconception  has  no  scope  here  as  to  why  the  scripture 
itself  should  first  show  the  two  aspects  of  Brahman,  only  to 
deny  them  the  next  moment  contrary  to  the  popular  adage, 
“Rather  than  wash  away  the  mud,  it  is  much  better  to  avoid  its 


III.  ii.  22  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  627 

very  contact  from  a  distance”.  For  this  scripture  does  not 
present  the  two  aspects  of  Brahman  as  subjects  fit  for  being 
expounded,  but  it  simply  refers  to  these  aspects  that  are  super¬ 
imposed  on  Brahman  and  are  popularly  well  recognized;  and 
this  is  done  for  the  sake  of  denying  them  and  establishing  the 
real,  pure  nature  of  Brahman.  Thus  it  is  all  beyond  cavil.  These 
two  negatives  deny  respectively  the  two  aspects,  gross  and 
subtle,  according  to  their  numeral  order.  Or  it  may  be  that  the 
first  negative  denies  the  totality  of  elements,  and  the  second 
negative,  the  totality  of  impressions.  Or  the  “Not  so,  not  so” 
is  used  in  a  repetitive  sense,  implying  thereby  that  whatever  is 
guessed  on  Brahman  as  “this  much”  has  no  reality.  For  should 
the  negation  apply  only  to  the  limited  things  already  enumerated, 
the  question  may  arise,  “If  this  is  not  Brahman,  what  else  is?” 
But  when  the  “repetition”  is  used,  all  objects  of  knowledge 
become  denied,  and  it  follows  that  one’s  inmost  Self,  that  is  not 
an  object  of  knowledge,  is  Brahman;  thus  the  curiosity  to  know 
further  ceases.  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  the  phenomenal 
expressions,  imagined  on  Brahman,  are  denied,  and  Brahman 
stands  out  as  outside  the  negation. 

This  conclusion  is  arrived  at  from  the  further  consideration 
that  after  that  denial  it  is  stated  again,  “There  is  something  other 
than  this  which  is  beyond”  (Bf.  II.  iii.  6).  Were  the  negation 
to  end  in  mere  non-existence,  what  else  could  have  been  referred 
to  by  the  text  as  being  different  and  beyond?  On  this  interpreta¬ 
tion,  the  words  (of  the  aphorism)  are  to  be  construed  thus: 
“Having  taught  Brahman  with  the  words  ‘Not  so,  not  so’  (ibid.), 
the  Upani$ad  explains  that  instruction  over  again.” 

What  is  the  meaning  of  “Not  so,  not  so”? 

The  meaning  is  this:  Since  there  is  surely  nothing  besides  this 
Brahman,  therefore  Brahman  is  called  “Not  so,  not  so”.  It  does 
not  mean  that  Brahman  Itself  does  not  exist.  And  that  very  fact 
is  shown  by  asserting  that  a  Brahman  does  exist  which  is  beyond 
all  else  and  which  is  not  denied. 

The  words  of  the  Upani$ad  may,  however,  be  construed  thus: 
“Because  there  is  no  other  (and  more  appropriate)  description 
than  this,  therefore  it  is  called  ‘Not  so,  not  so’”  (ibid.),  the 
meaning  being,  “Because  apart  from  teaching  by  way  of  negating 


628  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  22 

the  phenomenal  world  of  manifestations,  there  is  no  better  de¬ 
scription  of  Brahman”.  Then  in  that  case  the  words  of  the 
aphorism,  “(The  text)  speaks  of  something  more  than  that” 
should  be  taken  to  mean  “Its  name”;  for  the  text  speaks  about 
the  name  thus,  “Now  is  Its  name,  ‘The  Truth  of  truth’.  The 
vital  force  is  truth,  and  It  is  the  Truth  of  that”  (ibid.).  That 
becomes  proper  if  the  negation  leads  to  (i.e.  stops  short  of) 
Brahman.  For  if  the  negation  culminates  in  non-existence,  what 
could  have  been  mentioned  as  the  “Truth  of  truth”?  Hence 
our  definite  conclusion  is  that  this  denial  leads  to  Brahman  and 
does  not  end  in  non-existence. 

That  (Brahman)  is  aroq^  unmanifest,  for  3TIf[  (the 
Upani$ad)  says  (so). 

23.  That  Brahman  is  mmanifest ,  for  the  Upani$ad  says  so. 

Opponent :  If  Brahman,  different  from  and  superior  to  the 
manifold  world  of  manifestation  that  has  been  denied,  does 
exist,  why  is  It  not  perceived? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is:  Because  It  is  not  manifest,  because 
It  is  supersensuous,Tt  being  the  witness  of  all.  For  the  Upani§ads 
declare  It  thus  in  the  texts:  “It  is  not  comprehended  through  the 
eye,  nor  through  speech,  nor  through  the  other  senses;  nor  is 
It  attained  through  austerity  or  karma”  (Mu.  III.  i.  3);  “This 
Self  is  that  which  has  been  described  as  ‘Not  so,  not  so’.  It  is 
imperceptible,  for  It  is  never  perceived”  (Bj\  III.  ix.  26);  “That 
which  cannot  be  perceived  and  grasped”  (Mu.  I.  i.  6);  “When¬ 
ever  an  aspirant  gets  fearlessly  established  in  this  changeless, 
bodiless,  inexpressible,  and  supportless  Brahman”  (Tai.  II.  vii.  1), 
and  so  on.  The  Smrti  also  says,  “He  is  said  to  be  undetermined, 
unthinkable,  immutable”  (Gita,  II.  25),  and  so  on. 

arfq  i^vii 

affr  Moreover,  (Brahman  is  realized)  in  sctmadhi 

(perfect  meditation  or  absorption)  SRW-3r^HHIWTP(  as  is 
known  from  direct  revelation  and  inference. 


m.ii.25]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  629 

24.  Moreover ,  Brahman  is  realized  in  samadhi,  as  is  known 
from  direct  revelation  and  inference . 

Moreover,  the  Yogins  realize,  during  sccrnradhana,  this  Self 
(i.e.  Brahman)  which  is  free  from  the  entire  universe  of  phenom¬ 
enal  manifestation  and  is  supersensuous.  Samrddhana  means  the 
act  of  devotion,  contemplation,  deep  meditation,  and  such  other 
practices  (e.g.  japa  etc.). 

Opponent :  How,  again,  is  it  known  that  they  experience  this 
during  such  adoration? 

Vedantin :  “From  direct  revelation  and  inference”,  that  is  to 
say,  from  Vedic  texts  and  Smftis.  To  quote  from  the  Vedic 
texts:  “The  self-existent  Lord  destroyed  (i.e.  incapacitated)  the 
outgoing  senses.  Therefore  one  sees  the  outer  things  and  not  the 
inner  Self.  A  rare  discriminating  man,  desiring  for  immortality, 
turns  his  eyes  away  and  then  sees  the  indwelling  Self”  (Ka.  II. 
i.  1),  “Since  one  becomes  purified  in  mind  through  the  favour¬ 
ableness  of  the  intellect,  therefore  can  one  see  that  indivisible 
Self  through  meditation”  (Mu.  III.  i.  8),  and  so  on.  There  are 
also  Smjti  texts,  “Salutation  to  that  Effulgence,  the  Self,  that  is 
realizable  through  Yoga,  and  is  seen  by  those  who  practise 
meditation,  who  are  free  from  sleep  (lethargy),  who  have 
controlled  their  senses.  The  Yogins  realize  that  Lord  who  is 
eternal”,  and  similar  texts. 

Opponent :  On  the  assumption  of  a  relationship  between  the 
entity  meditated  on  and  the  meditator,  the  supreme  Self  and 
the  individual  Self  become  separated. 

Vedantin :  The  reply  is,  No. 


^TRWkt  IRKII 


«3r  And  the  effulgent  One  (i.e.  Self)  (appears  to  be 

different)  yiifrr  during  activity  (like  meditation)  g^TT^T-arrfe-^ 
as  is  the  case  with  light  etc.;  ^  yet  (naturally  there  is)  ar-3  $1*3*1 
non-difference;  as  is  evident  from  repetition. 


25.  And  the  effulgent  Self  appears  to  be  different  during 
activity,  as  is  the  case  with  light  etc.;  yet  (intrinsically)  there 


630  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [III.ii.25 

is  non-difference  as  is  evident  from  repetition  (of  “ That  thou 
art”). 

As  light,  space,  the  sun,  etc.  appear  to  be  diversified  in  relation 
to  the  activity  taking  place  in  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  a  finger, 
a  pail,  water,  etc.,  and  yet  they  do  not  give  up  their  natural 
unity,  so  also  this  difference  in  the  Self  is  a  creation  of  limiting 
adjuncts;  but  in  Its  own  essence  It  is  the  one  Self  alone.  And 
thus  it  is  that  the  non-difference  of  the  individual  soul  and  the 
supreme  Self  is  established  repeatedly  (in  such  texts  as  “That 
thou  art” — Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi). 

3TrftSf!?^T  ff  \R%\\ 

3TT:  Hence  (unity)  sr^T  with  Infinity;  because  <PTT  such 
(is)  the  indicatory  mark. 

26.  Hence  (the  individual  gets)  unity  with  the  Infinite;  for 
such  is  the  indicatory  mark  (in  the  Upanifad). 

“Hence”,  too,  for  this  further  reason  that  non-difference  is 
natural  whereas  difference  is  a  creation  of  ignorance,  the  indi¬ 
vidual  destroys  ignorance  through  knowledge  and  attains  unity 
with  the  supreme,  eternal,  conscious  Self.  “For  such  is  the 
indicatory  mark” — contained  in  such  texts  as,  “Anyone  who 
knows  that  supreme  Brahman  becomes  Brahman  indeed”  (Mu. 

III.  ii.  9),  “Being  but  Brahman,  he  is  absorbed  in  Brahman”  (Bj\ 

IV.  iv.  6),  and  so  on. 

IRV9II 

g  But  since  both  (difference  and  non-difference) 

are  mentioned,  (the  relationship  is)  as  between  a 

snake  and  its  coil. 

27.  But  since  both  difference  and  non-difference  are  men - 
tioned,  the  relationship  (between  the  supreme  Self  and  the 
individual  is)  as  that  between  the  snake  and  its  coil. 


III.ii.28]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  631 

With  regard  to  that  very  relationship  between  the  entity 
meditated  on  and  the  meditator,  another  view  is  adduced  with 
the  idea  of  clearing  our  own.  In  some  places  difference 
between  the  individual  soul  and  the  supreme  Self  is  mentioned, 
as  in,  “Therefore  can  one  see  that  indivisible  Self  through  medi¬ 
tation”  (Mu.  III.  i.  8),  where  the  difference  exists  like  that 
between  the  subject  and  object  of  meditation  or  between  the 
seer  and  the  seen;  in  “reaches  the  self-effulgent  Puru$a  that  is 
higher  than  the  higher  Maya”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  8),  where  the  differ¬ 
ence  is  as  between  the  attainer  and  the  goal  to  be  attained;  in 
“who  controls  all  beings  from  within”  (By.  III.  vii.  15),  where 
exists  the  difference  as  between  the  ruler  and  the  ruled. 
Elsewhere,  again,  the  non-difference  of  those  very  ones  is  men¬ 
tioned,  as  in,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi),  “I  am  Brahman” 
(Bf.  I.  iv.  10),  “This  is  your  Self  that  is  within  all”  (Bj\  III. 
iv.  1),  “This  is  the  Internal  Ruler,  your  own  immortal  Self” 
(Bf.  III.  vii.  3-22).  Now  in  the  face  of  this  dual  mention,  if 
non-difference  alone  be  accepted  to  the  exclusion  of  difference, 
the  mention  of  difference  will  be  left  without  any  substance.  So 
from  the  mention  of  both  difference  and  non-difference,  the 
reality  here  must  be  like  the  snake  and  its  coil.  As  in  the  illus¬ 
tration,  the  snake  in  itself  is  non-different,  but  it  differs  in  its 
having  a  coil,  or  a  hood,  or  an  extended  posture;  so  also  is 
the  case  here  (with  Brahman). 

IRSH 

Or  like  light  and  its  source  (both) 

being  effulgence. 

28.  Or  they  are  like  light  and  its  source ,  both  being  but 
effulgence. 

Or  this  is  to  be  understood  on  the  analogy  of  light  and  its 
substratum.  Just  as  the  sunlight  and  its  substratum,  the  sun,  are 
luminous,  and  not  entirely  different,  both  being  equally  efful¬ 
gent,  and  yet  they  are  thought  of  as  different,  similar  is  the  case 
here. 


632  BRAHMA -SCrTRA-BHASYA  [III.ii.29 

^ai  IR5.II 

29.  Or  (the  relationship  between  the  individual  and  the 
supreme  Self  is)  as  already  shown . 

Or  it  may  be  just  as  it  was  presented  earlier  by  saying,  “And 
the  effulgent  Self  appears  to  be  different  during  activity,  as  is 
the  case  with  light  etc.”  (III.  ii.  25);  for  on  that  view  alone 
bondage  is  a  creation  of  ignorance,  so  that  the  achievement  of 
liberation  through  knowledge  becomes  justifiable.  If  on  the 
other  hand,  it  is  understood  that  the  individual  soul  is  under 
bondage  in  a  real  sense,  and  that  it  is  a  certain  state  of  the 
supreme  Self  on  the  analogy  of  the  snake  and  its  coil,  or  a  part 
of  that  Self  on  the  analogy  of  the  light  and  its  source,  then 
since  a  bondage  that  is  real  cannot  be  removed,  the  scripture 
speaking  of  liberation  will  become  useless.  And  it  is  not  a  fact 
that  the  Upani$ads  declare  both  difference  and  non-difference  as 
equally  valid  in  the  present  case;  on  the  contrary  the  Upani$ads 
declare  non-difference  alone  as  the  view  to  be  established,  while 
with  the  idea  of  speaking  of  something  else  (i.e.  non-difference), 
they  merely  refer  to  difference  as  a  thing  already  conventionally 
recognized.  Hence  the  real  conclusion  is  this:  There  is  no 
difference  “as  is  the  case  with  light  etc.” 

srfdfora  U3°ii 

30.  And  on  account  of  the  denial. 

And  this  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  the  scrip¬ 
ture  denies  the  existence  of  any  other  conscious  entity  apart 
from  the  supreme  Self,  in  texts  like,  “There  is  no  other  witness 
but  Him”  (Bj\  III.  vii.  23),  and  so  on,  as  also  in,  “Now  there¬ 
fore  the  description  of  Brahman,  ‘Not  so,  not  so’,”  (Bj\  II.  iii. 
6),  “That  Brahman  is  without  prior  or  posterior,  without  interior 
or  exterior”  (Bj\  II.  v.  19).  Since  this  variety  of  phenomenal 
manifestation  is  denied  to  exist  separately  from  Brahman,  and 
since  Brahman  alone  is  left  over  as  the  only  ultimate  reality, 
therefore  we  understand  that  this  alone  is  the  established 
conclusion. 


III.  ii.  3 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A$YA 

Topic  7:  Brahman  One  without  a  Second 


633 


From  the  fact  that  the  Upani§ads  are  at  variance  a  doubt 
arises  as  to  whether  any  reality  exists  or  does  not  exist  which 
is  higher  than  this  Brahman  that  is  ascertained  to  be  devoid 
of  the  entire  variety  of  phenomenal  manifestations.  Certain 
sentences,  when  taken  in  an  apparent  sense,  seem  to  prove  some 
other  entity  higher  even  than  Brahman.  This  is  an  attempt  at 
refuting  those  texts. 


Superior  to  this  (Brahman) 
because  of  the  mention  of  embankment,  measure  (i.e. 
limitation),  connection,  and  difference. 


31.  There  is  some  entity  superior  to  this  Brahman ,  because 
of  the  mention  of  embankment ,  measure ,  connection ,  and 
difference. 


Opponent :  There  should  be  an  entity  higher  than  this 
Brahman. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  reference  (in  the  Upani$ad)  to  embankment, 
magnitude,  connection,  and  difference.  Of  these  the  mention  of 
the  term  embankment  occurs  in,  “Now  then,  that  which  is 
the  Self  is  an  embankment,  a  sustainer  (or  impounder)”  (Ch. 
VIII.  iv.  1),  where  Brahman,  referred  to  by  the  word  Self, 
is  declared  to  be  an  embankment.  And  the  word  embankment  is 
in  vogue  in  the  world  in  the  sense  of  a  barrage  of  earth  and  tim¬ 
ber  to  check  the  flow  of  a  current  of  water.  Here  also  the  word 
embankment,  having  been  used  for  the  Self,  leads  us  to  under¬ 
stand  that,  as  in  the  case  of  the  ordinary  embankment,  something 
other  than  it  exists,  so  also  something  other  than  the  Self,  called 
the  embankment,  does  exist.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  use  of 
the  term  “crossing  over”  in,  “having  crossed  over  the  embank¬ 
ment”  (Ch.  VIII.  iv.  2),  from  which  it  is  gathered  that  just  as 
in  life  somebody  crosses  (a  stream)  over  the  embankment  to 
reach  solid  ground,  which  is  other  than  the  embankment,  so 


634  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  ii.  31 

also  one  crosses  over  this  embankment,  that  is  the  Self,  to  reach 
something  that  is  not  the  embankment  of  the  Self. 

There  occurs  also  the  mention  of  measurement  (i.e.  limited 
size)  as  in,  “This  Brahman,  that  is  such,  has  four  feet”  (Ch. 
III.  xviii.  2),  “Brahman  has  eight  hoofs,  sixteen  parts”6  (Ch.  IV. 
v).  It  is  also  seen  in  common  life  that  whatever  can  be 
measured  (or  counted)  to  be  so  much,  as  for  instance  (the 
coins  called)  karsapanas ,  presupposes  the  existence  of  something 
other  than  itself;  so  also  as  Brahman  has  been  measured,  there 
must  be  something  other  than  Itself. 

Thus  also  there  is  the  mention  of  connection:  “O  amiable 
one,  the  individual  soul  then  becomes  unified  with  Existence” 
(Ch.  VI.  viii.  1),  “the  embodied  soul”  (Tai.  II.  iii.  1),  “fully 
embraced  by  the  supreme  Self”  (Bp.  IV.  iii.  21).  And  limited 
things  are  seen  to  come  into  contact  with  a  limited  thing,  as  for 
instance  human  beings  with  a  city.  The  Upani$ad  mentions  the 
connection  of  the  individuals  with  Brahman  in  sleep.  Therefore 
it  is  understood  that  there  is  something  unlimited  which  is 
superior  to  Brahman. 

The  mention  of  difference  also  leads  to  the  same  idea.  Thus 
in  the  text,  “Now  then  the  golden  (effulgent)  infinite  Being 
that  is  seen  in  the  sun”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  6),  the  Lord  residing  in  the 
sun  is  mentioned;  and  then  the  Lord  residing  in  the  eye  is 
mentioned  separately  in,  “And  the  infinite  Being  that  is  seen  in 
the  eye”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  5).  Then  the  forms  etc.  of  the  Being  in 
the  sun  are  ascribed  to  the  Being  in  the  eye  as  well:  “Of  this 
latter  one  the  form  is  the  same  as  of  the  former;  He  has  the 
same  knuckles  as  the  former,  and  the  same  name  as  His”*  (ibid.). 
The  text  also  refers  to  the  limited  Godhood  of  both  of  them: 
of  the  former  it  is  spoken  in,  “And  He  rules  over  the  worlds 
that  are  above  the  sun,  and  the  things  dear  to  the  gods”  (Ch.  I. 
vi.  8);  of  the  latter  it  is  shown  in,  “And  He  rules  over  the 
worlds  that  are  below  (the  earth)  and  the  things  dear  to  men” 

°The  first  part  consists  of  the  four  directions;  the  second  of  earth,  sky, 
heaven,  and  sea;  the  third  of  fire,  sun,  moon,  and  lightning;  the  fourth 
of  eye,  ear,  speech,  and  mind.  Each  foot  has  two  hoofs;  thus  there  are 
eight  hoofs,  and  each  foot  has  four  parts,  thus  making  up  sixteen  parts. 
The  feet  are  called  bright,  unlimited,  luminous,  and  spacious  respectively. 


III.  ii.  32]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  635 

(Ch.  I.  vii.  6).  This  is  like  saying,  “This  is  the  domain  of  the 
king  of  Magadha,  and  this  of  the  king  of  Videha”. 

Vedantin :  The  conclusion  having  been  drawn  from  these 
references  to  embankment  etc.  that  there  is  some  entity  superior 
to  Brahman,  it  is  being  explained. 

IIV*U 

32.  But  ( the  Self  is  referred  to  as  cm  embankment)  on  account 
of  similarity . 

The  use  of  the  word  “but”  rules  out  the  conclusion  shown. 
Nothing  whatsoever  can  exist  separately  from  Brahman,  for 
that  lacks  proof.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  do  not  find  any  proof 
of  the  existence  of  anything  else.  For  it  has  been  ascertained 
that  anything  that  has  an  origin  derives  its  birth  etc.  from 
Brahman.  An  effect  is  non-different  from  a  cause;  and  nothing 
apart  from  Brahman  can  exist  that  is  birthless,  because  it  is 
definitely  stated  thus:  “O  amiable  one,  before  creation  all  this 
was  but  Brahman,  one  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1).  And 
because  the  assertion  is  made  by  the  Upanisads  that  all  can  be 
known  when  the  One  is  known,  nothing  can  be  conceived  of 
as  existing  apart  from  Brahman. 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  pointed  out  by  us  that  the  references 
to  embankment  etc.  indicate  the  existence  of  some  entity 
different  from  Brahman? 

Vedantin :  In  answer  it  is  said,  no.  As  for  the  reference  to 
the  embankment,  it  cannot  prove  the  existence  of  anything 
outside  Brahman;  for  the  text  simply  says  that  the  Self  is  an 
embankment,  but  it  does  not  also  aver  that  there  is  something 
beyond  It.  Now  the  ground  for  your  assumption  of  something 
superior  is  that  the  idea  of  embankment  cannot  arise  unless 
there  is  something  different  from  it.  But  this  is  not  logical. 
This  queer  assumption  of  something  unknown  is  sheer  dogma¬ 
tism.  Moreover,  if  on  finding  the  Self  being  referred  to  as  an 
embankment,  one  can  assume  something  outside  this  embank¬ 
ment  on  the  analogy  of  the  commonly  known  embankment, 
then  one  may  as  well  assume  earth  and  timber  as  the  constituents 
of  this  embankment  (which  is  the  Self).  But  this  is  not  proper, 


636  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [HI.  ii.  32 

since  that  would  contradict  the  texts  about  birthlessness  etc. 
So  the  proper  position  that  emerges  is  that  the  word  embank¬ 
ment  is  used  with  regard  to  the  Self  on  account  of  Its  similarity 
with  the  embankment,  the  point  of  similarity  of  the  Self  with 
the  embankment  being  that  the  Self  holds  together  the  world 
(as  its  Inner  Ruler)  and  maintains  its  boundaries  (of  norms, 
duties,  etc.).  In  this  way  the  Self  under  discussion  is  praised 
by  saying  that  it  is  like  an  embankment.  As  for  the  expression, 
“having  crossed  over  the  embankment”  (Ch.  VIII.  iv.  2),  the 
literal  sense  of  going  beyond  being  impossible  here,  the  mean¬ 
ing  that  stands  out  is  that  of  “attaining”,  as  for  instance  the 
expression,  “He  has  crossed  over  grammar”  means  “He  has 
mastered  it”,  but  not  gone  beyond. 

\mw 

afe-3pir:  For  the  sake  of  intellectual  grasp  like  the 

feet. 

33.  For  the  sake  of  intellectual  grasp  (Brahman's  magnitude 
is  spoken  of)  just  like  the  feet  (of  the  mind  or  of  space),  (or 
the  quarters  of  the  kar$apana). 

As  for  the  argument  that  something  superior  exists  on  account 
of  the  mention  of  magnitude,  our  answer  is  this:  Even  the 
reference  to  measure  is  not  meant  for  conveying  the  idea  of 
some  entity  other  than  Brahman. 

What  is  it  meant  for  then? 

It  is  meant  for  intellectual  grasp,  that  is  to  say,  for  the  sake 
of  meditation.  How  can  a  man  ever  have  any  steady  idea  that 
Brahman  is  possessed  of  four  feet,  eight  hoofs,  and  sixteen  parts? 
Hence  it  is  (for  the  sake  of  meditation)  that  some  magnitudes 
are  merely  fancied  about  Brahman  with  the  help  of  changeful 
things.  Not  that  all  men  can  fix  their  minds  steadily  on  Brahman, 
changeless  and  infinite  as  It  is,  for  men’s  intellects  may  be  sharp, 
mediocre,  or  dull.  It  is  like  the  imagination  of  the  four  feet,  as 
it  is  in  the  case  of  mind  and  space,  which  are  mentioned  as  the 
two  symbols  of  Brahman  on  the  corporeal  and  divine  planes.  As 
speech  (nose,  eye,  ear),  etc.  are  fancied  as  the  four  feet  in  the 


Ill.ii.  34] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


637 


case  of  mind,  and  fire,  (air,  sun,  and  direction),  etc.  as  the 
four  feet  in  the  case  of  space,  so  also  is  the  case  here.  Or 
padavat  means  like  quarters.  As  in  the  case  of  (the  coin  called) 
kar$apana ,  it  is  fancied  to  be  divided  into  four  quarters  in  order 
to  facilitate  transaction  through  it,  inasmuch  as  all  cannot  use  a 
whole  kar$apana  in  all  kinds  of  dealing  everywhere,  the  volumes 
of  sale  and  purchase  being  variable,  similarly  in  the  infinite 
Brahman  (magnitude  is  imagined  for  the  sake  of  meditation). 

On  account  of  particular  environments  (i.e. 
limiting  adjuncts)  5r^RT-3rrfe-^  as  in  the  case  of  light  etc. 

H.  ( Connection  and  difference  are  mentioned  about  Brahman) 
from  the  point  of  view  of  limiting  adjuncts,  as  in  the  case  of 
light  etc . 

The  two  objections  about  the  mention  of  connection  and 
difference  are  met  in  this  aphorism.  The  statement,  too,  that 
was  made  that  from  the  references  to  connection  and  difference 
it  follows  that  something  superior  to  Brahman  exists,  is  wrong, 
for  these  references  can  be  possible  for  the  very  same  thing 
from  the  points  of  view  of  particular  situations.  As  for  the  text 
referring  to  connection,  it  means  this:  Particularized  knowledge 
arises  from  the  contact  of  the  Self  with  particular  environments 
consisting  of  such  limiting  adjuncts  as  the  intellect.  When  that 
particularized  knowledge  ceases  on  the  cessation  of  the  limiting 
adjuncts,  that  cessation  is  metaphorically  spoken  of  as  the  (indi¬ 
vidual  soul’s)  contact  with  the  Self;  this  is  spoken  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  limiting  adjunct,  but  not  from  any  idea  of  limita¬ 
tion.  So  also  the  reference  to  difference  is  made  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  diversity  of  the  limiting  adjuncts  of  Brahman, 
but  not  from  Its  own  point  of  view.  “As  in  the  case  of  light 
etc.”  is  said  by  way  of  furnishing  an  illustration.  Just  as  a  single 
light,  be  it  of  the  sun  or  the  moon,  undergoes  diversity  owing 
to  contact  with  conditioning  factors,  but  it  is  said  to  become 
united  with  its  source  when  the  conditioning  factors  are 
removed,  and  the  same  light  is  said  to  be  different  owing  to  the 


638  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  34 

difference  in  the  conditioning  factors,  so  also  is  the  case  here. 
Or  it  is  like  the  mention  of  connection  and  difference  from  the 
point  of  view  of  mere  limiting  adjuncts  in  such  cases  as  the 
spaces  within  the  eye  of  a  needle,  a  loop  etc. 

35.  And  because  (such  a  position  alone  is)  logically  justifiable . 

And  this  kind  of  connection  alone,  and  not  of  any  other  kind, 
is  logically  sustainable;  for  it  is  self-identity  that  is  spoken  of  as 
this  relation  in,  “He  attains  his  own  Self’  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1).  And 
this  is  so,  since  one’s  own  nature  is  inalienable.  The  relation  here 
cannot  be  like  that  between  a  man  and  a  town.  But  precisely 
because  the  true  nature  has  a  covering  of  limiting  adjuncts,  the 
text,  “He  attains  his  own  Self”,  can  be  logically  sustained.  So 
also  the  difference  cannot  be  of  any  other  kind,  for  that  would 
contradict  the  oneness  of  God  well  recognized  in  numerous 
Upani$adic  passages.  It  is  thus  also  that  the  Upani$ad  explains 
how  there  can  be  a  mention  of  difference  in  the  case  of  the 
very  same  space  owing  to  differences  of  environment,  in  such 
texts  as,  “The  space  that  is  outside  a  man”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  7),  “The 
space  that  is  within  a  man”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  8),  and  “The  space 
that  is  within  the  heart”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  9). 

u^n 

^TT  Similarly  from  the  denial  of  all  else. 

36 .  Similarly  from  the  denial  of  everything  else  (it  follows 
that  there  is  nothing  but  Brahman ). 

Having  thus  set  at  naught  all  the  reasons,  like  the  use  of  terms 
like  embankment,  that  were  advanced  by  the  opponent,  the 
aphorist  now  concludes  by  supporting  his  own  position  by 
another  reason:  “Similarly  from  the  denial  of  everything  else”, 
too,  it  is  understood  that  there  is  nothing  else  superior  to 
Brahman.  Thus  there  are  the  texts,  “It  is  He  who  exists  below, 
it  is  I  who  exist  below”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  1),  “It  is  the  Self  that  is 
below”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2),  “All  oust  one  who  knows  it  as 


III.ii.37]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  639 

different  from  the  Self”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  6),  “All  this  is  but  Brahman” 
(Mu.  II.  ii.  11),  “All  this  is  but  the  Self”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2), 
“There  is  no  diversity  whatever  in  It”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  19),  “That 
beyond  which  there  is  nothing  either  superior  or  inferior  (prior 
or  posterior)”  (Sv.  III.  9),  “That  Brahman  is  without  prior  or 
posterior,  without  interior  or  exterior”  (Bj\  II.  v.  19).  These 
and  such  other  texts,  which  occur  in  the  contexts  dealing  with 
Brahman  Itself  and  cannot  be  interpreted  otherwise,  rule  out 
any  thing  other  than  Brahman.  And  from  the  text  that  Brahman 
is  in  all  creatures  (Ka.  II.  ii.  9-11,  Bj\  II.  v.  19)  it  is  understood 
that  there  is  no  other  Self  within  the  supreme  Self. 


Hereby  omnipresence  aTiqrq-^-srrfoaT:  on 

the  strength  of  words  like  extension  etc. 

37.  Hereby  (is  established)  the  omnipresence  (of  the  Self), 
(as  is  known)  on  the  strength  of  (JJpanisadic)  words  like  exten¬ 
sion  and  other  sources  (i.e.  Srnrti  and  logic). 

“Hereby”,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  refutation  of  (the  argu¬ 
ments  based  on)  the  mention  of  terms  like  embankment  etc., 
and  with  the  help  of  the  negation  of  all  other  things,  “is  also 
established  the  omnipresence  of  the  Self”.  For  it  cannot  be 
proved  otherwise,  since  on  the  assumption  that  the  terms  like 
embankment  etc.  are  mentioned  in  a  literal  sense,  the  Self  will 
become  a  limited  entity,  inasmuch  as  the  embankments  etc.  are 
themselves  limited  in  that  sense.  Similarly,  if  the  denial  of  all 
other  things  (by  the  scriptures)  be  not  a  fact,  the  Self  will 
become  a  limited  entity,  since  one  thing  becomes  delimited  by 
another.  And  the  omnipresence  of  the  Self  is  known  from  such 
terms  as  extensiveness,  the  word  extension  being  used  in  the 
sense  of  pervasiveness.  Texts  like  the  following,  “The  Space 
(Brahman)  within  the  heart  is  as  extensive  as  the  Space  outside” 
(Ch.  VIII.  i.  3),  “He  is  omnipresent  like  space  and  eternal”, 
“He  is  greater  than  heaven”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  3),  “greater  than 
space”  (S.  B.  X.  vi.  3.2.),  “This  one  is  eternal,  omnipresent, 


640  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  37 

steady,  unchanging”  (Gita,  II.  24),  and  similar  Upani$adic  and 
Smrti  texts,  as  well  as  logic,  teach  the  omnipresence  of  the  Self. 

Topic  8:  Fruits  of  Action 

Of  that  Brahman  Itself  another  characteristic  is  being  de¬ 
scribed  that  is  in  evidence  during  phenomenal  existence  in  which 
occurs  a  division  between  the  ordainer  and  the  ordained. 

w^w 

Fruit  (of  action)  a^r:  (comes)  from  this  one,  on 

grounds  of  logic. 

38.  The  fruit  of  action  is  from  Him ,  this  being  the  logical 
position. 

Doubt :  With  regard  to  the  well-known  results  of  actions  of 
creatures  which  fall  under  three  classes — the  desirable,  the 
undesirable,  and  the  mixed — and  belong  to  the  state  of  trans¬ 
migration,  the  thought  arises  as  to  whether  they  spring  from 
the  karmas  (rites  etc.)  or  from  God. 

Vedantin :  While  in  this  predicament,  the  reasonable  position 
is  that  “the  fruit  (of  action)”  should  be  “from  this  one”,  from 
God. 

Why? 

“This  being  the  logical  position.”  Since  He  presides  over 
everything,  and  since  He  is  fully  aware  of  the  specific  environ¬ 
ment  and  time  conducive  to  the  different  kinds  of  creation,  pre¬ 
servation,  and  dissolution,  it  is  but  logical  that  He  should  ordain 
the  fruits  of  works  for  the  people  according  to  their  merit. 
But  it  does  not  stand  to  reason  that  fruits  can  come  at  some 
future  time  from  actions  which  get  destroyed  the  next  moment; 
because  something  cannot  come  out  of  nothing. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  an  action,  even  while  it  is 
being  destroyed  produces  a  result  proper  to  itself,  during  the 
time  that  it  lasts,  and  then  only  it  is  destroyed;  and  that  result 
is  attained  by  the  agent  of  the  act  at  some  distant  time. 

Vedantin :  That  too  does  not  remove  the  difficulty;  for  there 
can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  result  till  the  agent  of  the  act  comes 


III.  ii.  40]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  641 

to  possess  it,  inasmuch  as  any  happiness  or  sorrow  experienced 
by  any  soul  at  any  time  is  recognized  in  the  world  to  be  such  a 
result  relatively  to  that  very  time.  And  common  people  do  not 
recognize  any  happiness  or  sorrow  unrelated  to  a  soul  to  be  a 
result.  Again,  if  it  be  maintained  that  though  the  result  may 
not  issue  just  after  the  action,  it  can  issue  (in  the  future)  out  of 
the  unseen  potency  emerging  out  of  the  act,  that  too  is  unjusti¬ 
fiable,  for  potency,  which  is  inert  like  stocks  and  stones,  cannot 
act  unless  stimulated  by  some  conscious  agent.  Besides,  such  an 
unseen  potency  lacks  any  valid  proof. 

Opponent :  Presumption  from  the  seen  result  ( arthapatti )  is  a 
proof  in  its  support. 

Vedantin :  No;  for  God  having  been  proved  to  be  the 
ordainer  of  results,  any  presumption  is  ruled  out  of  court. 

nun 

39.  (God  is  the  ordainer  of  results)  for  the  further  reason  that 
the  Upani$ads  say  so. 

It  is  not  merely  on  grounds  of  reason  that  we  think  of  God 
as  the  ordainer  of  results. 

On  what  more  grounds  then? 

We  think  of  God  as  the  ordainer  of  results,  because  that  is 
how  the  Upani$ads  speak.  For  instance,  there  is  the  text,  “That 
great  birthless  Self  is  the  bestower  of  food  all  round  and  the 
giver  of  wealth/’  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  24),  as  also  other  texts  of  this 
class. 


spr  ^  iiyoii 

For  these  very  reasons  drfi jfH:  Jaimini  (thinks)  sp? 
virtue  (i.e.  scriptural  conduct),  (to  be  the  cause). 

40.  For  these  very  reasons  Jaimini  considers  virtuous  deeds  to 
be  the  yielder  of  results. 

Mirnamsaka :  “The  teacher  Jaimini,  however,  considers 
virtuous  deeds  to  be  the  yielder  of  results”,  “for  these  very 
reasons”,  on  the  authority  of  the  Vedas  and  reason.  This  fact  is 
41 


642  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  ii.  40 

mentioned  in  the  Vedas  in  “One  wishing  for  heaven  shall  per¬ 
form  a  sacrifice”  (Taodya),  and  similar  texts.  That  text  contains 
an  injunction,  and  since  an  injunction  is  understood  to  have  an 
object  in  view,  the  sacrifice  becomes  the  object.  From  this  it 
becomes  obvious  that  the  sacrifice  is  the  producer  of  heaven;  for 
else  this  sacrifice  would  find  no  performer,  so  that  the  instruc¬ 
tion  about  it  would  become  meaningless. 

Objection :  Has  not  this  viewpoint  been  refuted  by  saying 
that  karma  that  has  but  a  momentary  existence  cannot  produce 
such  a  result? 

Mfmamsaka :  That  is  no  defect,  since  there  is  the  Vedic 
authority.  If  the  Vedic  authority  is  accepted,  one  has  to  think 
in  the  way  that  would  justify  the  kind  of  relation  between 
action  and  the  result  of  action  that  is  mentioned  in  the  Vedas. 
Unless  the  action,  while  undergoing  destruction,  produces  some 
unseen  potency,  it  cannot  produce  its  result  after  an  interval. 
Hence  the  inference  to  be  drawn  is  that  there  is  such  a  thing 
called  unseen  potency  which  may  be  either  some  subtle  state  of 
the  action  itself  or  some  previous  (seed)  state  of  the  result.  In 
this  way  the  position  stated  earlier  becomes  logical.  But  the 
theory  that  God  ordains  the  results  is  illogical.  For  one  uniform 
cause  cannot  produce  variegated  results;  that  will  lead  to  parti¬ 
ality  and  cruelty  on  God’s  part  and  the  performance  of  action 
will  be  useless.  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  results  are  produced 
by  virtuous  deeds  alone. 

35  ^  lhf?ll 

^  But  qr^RPT:  Badarayaija  (considers)  gcfrj  the  earlier  One 
owing  to  (His)  mention  as  the  cause  (even  of 

action). 

41.  But  Badarayana  considers  the  earlier  One  (viz  God)  (as 
the  bestovoer  of  results ),  because  He  is  mentioned  as  the  cause 
of  even  action. 

But  the  teacher  Badarayaoa  considers  the  earlier  One,  i.e.  God 
Himself,  as  the  bestower  of  results.  The  word  “but”  refutes 
the  views  that  the  result  is  obtained  either  from  the  action  itself 


III.  ii.  41  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  643 

or  the  unseen  potency  of  action.  The  accepted  conclusion  is  that 
the  result  comes  from  God,  be  it  either  by  taking  into  account 
the  action  itself  or  the  unseen  potency,  as  it  may. 

Why? 

“Because  He  is  mentioned  as  the  cause”.  For  God  is  presented 
as  the  cause  both  by  way  of  making  others  act  virtuously  or 
viciously  and  of  bestowing  the  results,  in  the  text,  “It  is  He 
Himself  who  makes  him  do  a  good  deed  whom  He  wishes  to 
raise  up  from  these  worlds;  and  it  is  He  Himself  who  makes  him 
do  a  bad  deed  whom  He  wishes  to  throw  down”  (Kau.  III.  8). 
This  fact  is  mentioned  in  the  Gita  as  well,  “Whichever  divine 
form  a  devotee  wants  to  worship  with  faith,  I  ordain  for  him 
unswerving  faith  in  that  very  form.  Endowed  with  that  faith,  he 
continues  in  the  worship  of  that  form,  and  obtains  from  it  the 
results  he  desires,  as  ordained  by  Me”  (Gita.  VII.  21-22).  In 
all  the  Upani$ads  creations  are  declared  as  the  acts  of  God.  And 
God’s  bestowing  of  results  consists  precisely  in  His  creating  the 
creatures  according  to  individual  merits.  The  defects  of  the 
impossibility  of  the  emergence  of  variegated  results  from  the 
very  same  cause,  and  so  on,  do  not  arise  since  God  acts  by 
taking  into  account  the  efforts  made  by  the  creatures. 


Section  III 


Topic  1:  Sameness  of  Meditation 

ll^tl 

Any  (particular)  conception  (for  medita¬ 
tion)  imparted  in  all  the  Upani$ads  (is  the  same)  ^faTT-anfe- 
on  account  of  the  sameness  of  injunction  etc. 

1.  Any  ( particular )  conception  for  meditation  (vijndna) 
imparted  in  all  the  Upanisads  is  the  same  on  account  of  the 
sameness  of  the  injunction  etc . 

The  reality  of  Brahman,  that  is  to  be  known,  has  been 
explained.  Now  is  being  considered  whether  the  vijnanas  differ 
according  to  the  different  Upani$ads  or  not. 

Opponent :  Has  it  not  been  ascertained  that  the  Brahman  to 
be  known  is  devoid  of  the  differences  of  priority  and  poste¬ 
riority  (i.e.  cause  and  effect),  and  It  is  homogeneous  like  a  lump 
of  salt?  So  how  can-  a  consideration  about  the  difference  or 
non-difference  of  vijnanas  (conceptions  about  Brahman)  arise? 
For  it  cannot  be  that  like  the  variety  of  rites  and  rituals,  the 
Upani$ads  seek  to  teach  any  multiplicity  about  Brahman  as  well; 
for  Brahman  is  one  with  a  uniform  characteristic.  It  is  not 
possible  to  have  different  kinds  of  vijnana  of  the  same  Brahman 
that  has  a  single  uniform  nature.  To  know  a  thing  otherwise 
than  what  it  is  cannot  be  anything  but  erroneous.  Should  the 
different  Upani$ads,  however,  teach  diverse  conceptions  about 
the  same  Brahman,  one  of  these  conceptions  will  be  correct 
while  the  rest  will  be  erroneous,  so  that  this  will  open  the  gate 
to  a  loss  of  faith  in  the  Upani§ads.  Hence  no  such  misconception 
should  be  entertained  that  the  conceptions  about  Brahman 
differ  in  different  Upani§ads.  It  is  not  also  possible  to  affirm  an 
identity  of  the  conceptions  on  the  basis  of  the  uniformity  of 
the  injunctions,  for  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  is  such  that  it 


Ill:  iii.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  645 

cannot  be  indicated  by  any  injunction.  Under  the  aphorism, 
“But  that  Brahman  is  known  from  the  Upani$ads,  because  of 
their  becoming  connected  with  Brahman  as  their  main  purport’* 
(I.  i.  4),  the  teacher  (Vyasa)  said  that  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  arises  from  (Vedic)  texts  about  Brahman  which  do 
not  convey  the  sense  of  any  injunction,  and  which  culminate 
in  the  realization  of  the  thing  itself.  So  how  can  this  discussion 
about  difference  and  non-difference  be  started? 

Vedantin :  That  is  being  stated.  This  discussion  about  differ¬ 
ence  and  non-difference  of  vijndnas  relates  to  the  qualified 
Brahman  and  to  Prana  etc.,  so  that  there  is  no  defect.  For  in 
this  field  there  is  a  possibility  of  difference  and  non-difference 
of  meditations  just  as  much  as  in  the  case  of  the  rites  etc.  Like 
ritualistic  actions,  the  meditations  are  also  spoken  of  as  having 
seen  and  unseen  results.  Some  of  them  lead  to  liberation  by 
stages  by  way  of  giving  rise  to  perfect  knowledge  ultimately, 
With  regard  to  these  there  is  a  possibility  of  the  discussion 
whether  a  particular  vijnana  differs  from  Upani$ad  to  Upani$ad 
or  it  does  not. 

As  to  that,  the  reasons  from  the  opponent’s  standpoint  are 
being  adduced:  To  start  with  then,  names  are  well  known  to 
stand  for  different  conceptions,  as  in  the  case  of  such  designa¬ 
tions  as  jyotir  (light,  indicating  the  Jyoti&oma  sacrifice).  Here 
also  as  regards  the  meditations,  enjoined  in  the  different  Upani- 
$ads,  we  meet  with  such  differences  of  names  as  Taittriyalca, 
Vajasaneyaka,  Kauthumaka,  Kau$Itaka,  Satyayanaka,  and  so  on. 
Similarly  also  the  difference  of  form  is  well  known  to  indicate 
a  difference  of  rites,  as  in  such  texts,  “The  coagulated  milk  (got 
by  mixing  curd  with  hot  milk)  is  for  the  Vi&vadevas  (all  gods), 
the  cheese-water  is  to  be  offered  to  the  sun”1.  And  here,  (as 
regards  the  meditations),  a  difference  of  forms  is  in  evidence; 
for  instance,  in  some  recensions  they  read  of  a  sixth  and  entirely 
different  fire  in  the  context  of  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires, 
whereas  others  have  only  five.  So  also  in  the  parable  of  Prana 
etc.,  some  have  a  fewer  number  of  the  organs  such  as  that 

lThe  assumption  is  that  the  second  portion,  “cheese-water”  etc.  is  not 
just  an  appendage  of  the  Visvedeva  sacrifice,  but  it  suggests  a  different 
sacrifice. 


646  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  1 

of  speech  etc.,  while  others  have  a  greater  number.  So  also  it 
is  argued  that  a  special  attribute  is  suggestive  of  a  difference  in 
rites  as  in  such  cases  as  the  Kariri  sacrifice.2  In  the  context  of 
vijnanas  also,  the  mention  of  special  attributes  is  met  with,  as 
for  instance,  the  vow  of  holding  fire  on  head,  enjoined  for  the 
followers  of  the  Atharva  Veda  (Mu.  III.  ii.  ID).  Thus  also  other 
tests  like  repetition,  (met  with  in  the  Purva-Mlmamsa),  which 
mark  out  one  act  from  another,  are  to  be  suitably  applied  here 
as  well.  Hence  the  vijnanas  differ  from  Upani$ad  to  Upani$ad. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  position,  we  say:  “The  vijnanas 
(conceptions  for  meditation)  imparted  in  all  the  Upani$ads” 
must  be  the  same  in  the  respective  Upani^ads. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  sameness  of  the  injunction  etc.”,  the  “etc.” 
being  used  for  implying  the  reasons  (viz  connection,  form,  and 
name)  that  determine  non-difference,  as  they  are  contained  in 
the  aphorism  stating  the  accepted  view  in  that  section  of  the 
Purva-Mlmamsa  that  deals  with  the  texts  of  other  branches  (of 
the  Vedas).  The  meaning  is  that  the  meditations  are  the  same 
because  of  the  similarity  of  connection,  form,  injunction,  and 
name.  Even  as  in  the  case  of  the  same  Agnihotra  sacrifice,  though 
occurring  in  the  different  branches  of  the  Vedas,  the  same  kind 
of  human  effort  is  enjoined  by  saying  “one  shall  sacrifice”, 
similarly  the  injunction  of  the  followers  of  the  Vajasaneya 
branch  is,  “He  who  knows  (i.e.  meditates  on)  that  which  is  the 
oldest  and  greatest”  (Bj\  VI.  i.  1),  and  similar  is  the  injunction 
of  the  Chandogas  (Ch.  V.  i.  1).  The  connection  with  the  result 
also  is  the  same,  which  is,  “He  becomes  the  oldest  and  the 
greatest  among  his  relatives”  (Bj\  VI.  i.  1).  And  the  form  of 
the  vijnana  in  both  the  places  is  the  same,  viz  that  the  principal 
Prana  is  possessed  of  the  special  qualities  of  being  the  oldest  and 
the  greatest.  Just  as  the  materials  and  the  deities  determine  the 
form  (or  nature)  of  the  sacrifice,  so  also  it  is  to  be  known  that 

“Students  of  the  texts  about  the  Kariri  sacrifice  (meant  for  rainfall), 
who  belong  to  the  Taittiriya  branch,  eat  on  the  ground,  but  not  so  the 
others.  Some,  when  reading  of  the  sacrificial  fire,  carry  the  water  jar  of 
the  teachers,  others  do  not.  Now  such  differences  in  conduct  cannot  be 
useless.  Hence  these  sacrifices  differ  according  to  their  attributes. 


III.  iii,  2  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  647 

the  form  of  the  vijndna  (is  determined  by  the  object,  viz  the 
reality  called  Prana).  For  the  vijndna  is  stamped  according  to 
the  principle  meditated  on.  The  name  too  is  the  same  in  both 
places,  namely  “the  meditation  on  Prana”.  Hence  the  vijnanas 
are  known  to  be  the  same  in  all  the  Upani$adic  concepts  of  medi¬ 
tation.  The  same  interpretation  is  to  be  applied  to  all  such  medi¬ 
tations,  as  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires,  the  meditation  on 
Vaisvanara,  the  Sandilya-Vidya ,  and  so  on. 

As  for  the  argument  that  (differences  in)  names,  forms  etc. 
apparently  imply  differences,  that  was  refuted  in  the  Purva- 
Mimamsa  under  the  aphorisms  starting  with,  “Rites  do  not  differ, 
just  because  of  the  occurrence  of  different  names,  for  they  are 
not  used  as  names  for  enjoined  rites”8  (XI.  iv.  10). 

Apprehending  another  possible  objection,  the  aphorist  refutes 
that  as  well: 

^^TFrfq  irii 

Owing  to  difference  (in  subsidiary  matters)  q-  (the 
vijnanas  are)  not  the  same  5%  if  such  be  the  view  ^  not 
(so)  arfa  (for)  even  in  the  same  vijndna  (differences 

in  details  are  possible). 

2.  If  it  be  said  that  the  vijnanas  cannot  be  the  same  onxnng  to 
the  difference  in  details y  then  not  so ,  for  difference  can  occur 
even  in  the  same  vijndna. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  the  sameness  of  the  vijnanas 
in  all  the  Upani$ads  cannot  be  logically  upheld  on  account  of  the 
differences  in  details.  Thus  it  is  seen  that  when  dealing  with  the 
meditation  on  the  five  fires,  the  followers  of  the  Vajasaneya 
branch  mention  a  sixth  fire  thus,  “This  fire  becomes  his  fire”  etc. 
(Bf.  VI.  ii.  14).  The  Chandogas  do  not  mention  it,  but  they 
conclude  with  the  number  five:  “Nov/  then,  he  who  knows 
(i.e.  meditates  on)  these  five  fires  thus”  (Ch.  V.  x.  10).  And 
how  can  the  meditations  be  the  same  for  both  those  who  have 

8  The  names  Kathaka,  Kalapaka,  for  instance,  are  not  the  names  of  the 
rites,  but.  have  reference  to  books.  Even  slight  differences  in  form  also 
do  not  make  the  rites  different.  The  special  characteristics  mentioned 
there  relate  to  study  and  not  to  any  rite. 


648  BRAHMA  -  SCrTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.2 

that  additional  factor  and  those  who  have  not?  It  is  not  possible 
to  understand  that  there  should  be  a  combination  of  the  details 
(found  in  both  the  places  for  the  same  thing),  since  the  number 
five  becomes  irreconcilable.  Similarly  in  the  parable  of  Prana , 
the  Chandogas  read  of  four  other  pranas ,  viz  speech,  eye,  ear, 
and  mind,  over  and  above  the  Prana  that  is  the  greatest,  whereas 
the  Vajasaneyins  read  of  a  fifth  as  well  in,  “The  seed  is  Prajati 
(having  the  power  of  generation).  He  who  knows  it  to  be  such 
becomes  enriched  with  children  and  animals”  (Bj\  VI.  i.  6). 
Moreover,  the  entity  to  be  meditated  on  differs  according  as 
something  is  added  to  or  dropped  out4;  and  from  the  difference 
of  the  entity  meditated  on,  the  meditation  itself  differs,  just  as 
much  as  the  sacrifices  differ  according  to  the  difference  in  their 
deities  and  accessories. 

Vedantin :  That  is  nothing  damaging,  since  this  kind  of  varia¬ 
tion  in  details  is  admissible  in  the  very  same  meditation.  Although 
(on  account  of  the  irreconcilability  of  the  number  five)  the 
sixth  fire  cannot  be  added  (by  taking  it  from  elsewhere),  still 
the  five  fires  counting  from  heaven  being  in  evidence  in  both 
the  places,  there  cannot  be  a  difference  in  the  meditation,  just 
as  the  Atiratra  sacrifice  does  not  differ  in  spite  of  taking  up  or 
not  taking  up  the  sacrificial  vessel  called  §o(Ja$I6.  Moreover,  the 
Chandogas  also  read  of  a  sixth  fire:  “When  he  departs  for 
attaining  the  world  earned  by  his  merit,  they  carry  him  to  the 
(funeral)  fire  itself”  (Ch.  V.  ix.  2).  The  Vajasaneyins,  however,  in 
their  eagerness  to  eliminate  (from  the  funeral  fire)  the  imagina¬ 
tion  of  smoke,  faggot,  etc.  that  are  associated  with  the  imaginary 
five  fires,  read  thus:  “The  (material)  fire  becomes  his  (i.e.  dead 
man’s)  fire,  the  (material)  fuel  his  fuel”  etc.  (Bj*.  VI.  ii.  14). 
That  is  only  by  way  of  a  restatement  of  a  commonly  known 
fact.6  Or  even  if  this  (sixth)  fire  be  meant  for  meditation,  then 

4 Avapa — adding  something  from  another  injunction,  and  udvapa— 
rejecting  something  enjoined  somewhere. 

“In  regard  to  this  sacrifice  two  contradictory  injunctions  about  using 
and  not  using  the  §odasi  are  met  with;  still  the  Mimamsakas  argue  that 
the  sacrifice  is  the  same,  the  use  of  the  $odasI  being  optional. 

“That  the  common  fire  bums  the  dead  meditator.  This  is  not  a  fire 
to  be  meditated  on,  the  five  foregoing  ones  only  being  meant  for  that. 


IILiii.  3]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  649 

the  Chandogas  also  can  add  this  trait  to  theirs.  And  it  should 
not  be  apprehended  that  the  number  five  will  stand  in  the  way; 
for  this  number,  enumerating  the  five  imaginary  fires  (involved 
in  the  meditation  based  on  superimposition),  is  a  restatement 
of  the  fact  already  known  (earlier  that  the  fires  are  five),  so  that 
it  is  not  a  part  of  any  injunction.  Hence  there  is  no  conflict. 
Similarly  in  the  anecdote  of  the  Prana  and  so  on,  it  is  nothing 
contradictory  to  add  somewhere  a  new  trait.  It  should  not  be 
apprehended  that  either  the  entity  meditated  on  or  the  medita¬ 
tion  differs  in  accordance  as  a  detail  is  added  to  or  given  up; 
for  though  a  certain  small  trait  may  be  added  or  deducted 
from  the  entity  meditated  on,  yet  the  meditation  is  recognized 
to  be  the  same  from  the  (persistence  of  the)  greater  quantum 
of  the  thing  to  be  known.  Hence  the  meditations  are  the  same 
in  the  different  Upani$ads. 

HIWIPRM  dfePW  ll^ll 

(The  rite  of  carrying  fire  on  the  head  is  an  appendage) 
gc||fcqiq^T  of  Vedic  study;  because  in  the  Samdcara 

(it  is  enjoined)  as  being  so,  ^  also  on  account 

of  competence,  ^  and  that  regulation  (is)  as 

in  the  case  of  libations. 

3 .  The  rite  of  carrying  fire  on  the  head  is  an  appendage  of 
Vedic  study ,  because  it  is  stated  to  be  so  in  the  Santdcdra}  and 
also  because  of  competence.  And  that  regulation  is  like  that 
about  libations . 

It  was  argued  that  since  the  followers  of  the  Atharva  Veda 
acknowledge  the  vow  of  holding  fire  on  the  head,  (sitting 
amidst  fires),  etc.  as  necessary  preconditions  for  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  knowledge,  while  others  do  not  do  so,  therefore  the 
knowledge  ( vidya )  differs.  That  is  being  refuted.  This  is  a  trait 
of  the  Vedic  study,  but  not  of  knowledge. 

How  is  this  known? 

Because  the  followers  of  the  Atharva  Veda  read  of  this  also 
as  a  Vedic  vow  “stated  to  be  so”,  mentioned  as  a  feature  of 
the  study  of  the  Veda,  in  the  Samdcara ,  in  the  book  imparting 


650 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A$YA 


[III.iii.3 


instruction  about  Vedic  vows.  And  from  the  text,  “One  that 
has  not  fulfilled  the  vow  (of  holding  fire  on  the  head)  does 
not  read  this”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  11),  which  is  concerned  with  the 
competence  of  the  person  concerned,  and  where  the  word 
“this”  is  used  and  the  study  of  the  text  is  clearly  mentioned,  it 
is  ascertained  that  this  vow  is  a  concomitant  (feature)  of  the 
study  of  their  own  Upani§ad. 

Opponent :  Since  in  the  text,  “To  them  alone  should  one 
expound  this  knowledge  of  Brahman  who  are  engaged  in  the 
practice  of  disciplines,  versed  in  the  Vedas,  and  devoted  to 
Brahman . . .  and  by  whom  has  been  duly  performed  the  vow 
of  holding  the  fire  on  the  head”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  10),  the  vow  is 
connected  with  the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  which  is  the  same 
in  all  the  Upani$ads,  therefore  it  follows  that  this  concomitant 
(trait)  will  get  combined  with  the  knowledge  everywhere. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  in  that  text,  too,  the  term  “This  (know¬ 
ledge  of  Brahman)”  brings  to  notice  the  subject  under  discussion, 
which  is  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  gathered  from  that 
particular  text;  and  hence  this  concomitant  trait  remains  asso¬ 
ciated  with  a  particular  text  only. 

“And  that  regulation  is  like  that  about  the  (seven)  libations” 
is  said  by  way  of  citing  an  illustration.  Just  as  from  the  fact 
that  the  seven  kinds  of  oblation,  counting  from  Saurya  to 
Sataudana ,  have  no  connection  with  the  three  (sacrificial)  fires 
mentioned  in  the  other  Vedas,  but  are  connected  with  the  one 
fire  (called  Ekar$i)  mentioned  in  the  Atharva  Veda,  these 
oblations  become  restricted  to  the  followers  of  the  Atharva 
Veda  alone,  so  also  this  concomitant  feature  must  be  restricted 
only  to  a  particular  kind  of  Vedic  study,  since  it  is  connected 
with  that.  From  this  also  it  follows  that  the  sameness  of 
knowledge  everywhere  is  beyond  cavil. 

^  imi 

4.  Moreover ,  (the  scripture )  reveals  (this  fact). 

The  Vedas  also  show  the  unity  of  the  knowledge,  for  in  all 
the  Upani$ads  the  selfsame  entity  to  be  known  is  taught,  as  it 
is  said  in,  “That  goal  which  all  the  Vedas  with  one  voice 


III.  iii.  5]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  651 

proclaim”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  15);  similarly,  “The  followers  of  the 
Rg  Veda  (i.e.  Hotfs)  discuss  this  very  one  in  the  context 
of  the  great  Uktha  (hymn),  the  priests  of  Yajur  Veda  (i.e. 
Adhvaryus)  sacrifice  to  this  one  in  the  fire,  and  the  Chandogas 
(Udgata  priests,  following  the  Sama  Veda)  sing  to  this  one  in 
their  great  vow”  (Ai.  A.  III.  ii.  3.12).  So  also  the  quality  of 
striking  terror  belonging  to  God,  that  is  mentioned  in  the  Kafha 
Upani$ad  in,  “The  supreme  Brahman  that  is  a  great  terror” 
(II.  iii.  2),  is  seen  to  be  referred  to  in  the  Taittirlya  Upani§ad 
for  the  sake  of  condemning  the  idea  of  duality,  in  the  text, 
“Whenever  the  aspirant  creates  (even)  a  little  difference  in  this 
Brahman,  he  is  struck  with  fear”  (II.  vii.  1).  So  also  the 
VaiSvanara  Self,  conceived  of  in  the  Bfhadaragyaka  (I.  i.  1) 
as  extending  from  heaven  to  earth,  is  referred  to  in  the 
Chandogya  Upanisad  as  something  already  well  known:  “But 
he  who  worships  this  Vaisvanara  Self  as  extending  from  heaven 
to  earth  and  recognized  as  one’s  inmost  Self”  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  1). 
Again,  it  is  seen  that  by  way  of  demonstrating  the  unity  of  the 
purport  of  all  the  Upani$ads,  the  Ukthas  (collections  of  hymns) 
etc.  enjoined  in  one  Upani$ad  are  adopted  in  other  Upani$ads 
for  the  sake  of  meditation;  and  from  this  it  can  be  concluded, 
on  the  logic  of  frequent  occurrence,  that  (like  the  unity  of  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman)  the  meditations  also  are  the  same  in  all 
the  Upani$ads. 


Topic  2:  Combination  of  Traits 

^  m\ 

^  And  A  combination  (is  to  be  effected)  *pn?f  in 

similar  meditations  3PT-3T*RT^  owing  to  non-difference  of  appli¬ 
cation  like  the  subsidiaries  of  an  injunction. 

5.  And  in  similar  meditations  (all)  the  traits  are  to  be 
combined ,  f or  there  is  no  difference  in  application  like  the 
subsidiaries  of  an  injunction. 

This  aphorism  is  meant  for  stating  the  result  of  the  previous 
discussion.  It  having  been  established  thus  that  all  the  Upani$ads 


652  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  5 

present  the  same  ideas  about  all  the  meditations,  the  traits  of 
any  meditation  mentioned  in  any  one  Upani§ad  have  to  be 
combined  with  the  same  meditation  everywhere  else;  for  their 
applications  are  not  different.  In  whatever  sense  any  one  of 
these  traits  becomes  helpful  to  a  meditation  at  one  place,  it 
becomes  so  in  the  same  way  elsewhere  as  well;  for  the  medita¬ 
tion  is  the  same  in  either  place.  Hence  “a  combination  is  to  be 
made,  like  the  subsidiaries  of  an  injunction”.  Just  as  the  partic¬ 
ular  features  of  such  rites  as  the  Agnihotra,  which  are  presented 
as  subsidiary  matters  in  connection  with  the  main  injunctions 
(of  Agnihotra  etc.),  are  combined  together  because  of  the 
sameness  of  that  Agnihotra  rite  everywhere,  so  also  is  the  case 
here.  Had  the  meditations  been  different,  the  (individual)  traits 
would  remain  tagged  on  to  their  separate  meditations  which, 
however,  would  not  become  inter-connected  by  way  of  one 
being  a  primary  meditation  and  the  others  subsidiary,  so  that 
the  traits  would  not  become  combined  together.  But  such  is 
not  the  case  when  the  meditations  are  the  same. 

An  elaboration  of  this  very  aphorism,  stating  the  result  as  it 
does,  will  be  made  in  the  aphorisms  starting  with,  “on  account 
of  the  non-difference  of  the  meditation  everywhere”  (III.  iii.  10). 

Topic  3:  Difference  of  Meditations 

spqsnrT  ll^ll 

apsrareiq;  (There  is)  difference  on  the  authority  (of 

the  difference)  of  texts  5%  ^c[  if  such  be  the  contention  ^  not 
so  owing  to  non-difference. 

6.  If  it  be  said  that  the  (Udgltha)  meditations  (in  the 
Chandogya  and  Brhaddranyaka  Upanisads)  are  different  on 
account  of  the  difference  of  (texts),  then  not  so,  for  there  is 
no  difference. 

In  the  Bfhadaranyaka  Upani$ad  the  start  is*  made  thus:  “The 
gods  said,  ‘Now  let  us  surpass  the  Asuras  (devils)  in  (this) 
sacrifice  through  the  Udgltha’.  They  said  to  the  organ  of  speech, 
‘Chant  the  Udgltha  for  us’”  (Bj\  I.  iii.  1-2),  and  then  the 


III.  iii.6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH  A§YA  653 

inferior  pranas  (organs)  of  speech  etc.  are  condemned  as  struck 
with  evil  by  the  Asuras  (devils),  and  lastly  the  chief  Prana  (in 
the  mouth)  is  mentioned  thus:  “Then  they  said  to  this  (chief) 
Prana  (vital  force)  in  the  mouth,  ‘Chant  (the  Udgltha)  for  us.’ 
‘All  right’,  said  the  vital  force  and  chanted  for  them”  (Bf.  I.  iii. 
7).  So  also  in  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad  the  commencement  is 
made  with,  “Then  the  gods  resorted  to  the  Udgltha,  under  the 
idea,  ‘We  shall  defeat  these  (devils)  by  this1”  (I.  ii.  1);  after 
that  the  pranas  (organs  )  are  condemned  as  struck  with  sin  by 
the  devils;  and  then  in  the  very  same  way  the  preference  for 
the  chief  Prana  (in  the  mouth)  is  shown  thus:  “Then  they 
meditated  on  this  vital  force,  that  is  in  the  mouth,  as  the  Udgltha 
(Ow)”  (I.  ii.  7).  It  can  be  understood  from  the  eulogy  of 
Prdria  at  both  the  places  that  what  is  enjoined  is  a  meditation 
on  Prana. 

A  doubt  arises  in  this  matter:  Do  the  meditations  differ  here, 
or  are  they  the  same?  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  The  meditations  are  the  same  on  account  of  the 
arguments  already  advanced. 

Objection :  The  sameness  of  the  meditations  is  untenable 
because  of  the  difference  in  the  manner  of  starting.  The 
Vajasaneyins  start  in  one  way,  while  the  Samavedins  do  in 
another  way.  The  Vajasaneyins  mention  Prana  as  the  singer  of 
the  Udgltha  in  their  text,  “(Then  they  said  to  this  vital  force 
in  the  mouth)  ‘Chant  the  Udgltha  for  us’  ”  (Bf.  I.  iii.  7), 
whereas  the  Samavedins  mention  the  vital  force  as  Udgltha  in, 
“They  meditated  on  him  as  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  ii.  7).  So  how  can 
there  be  an  identity  of  the  meditations? 

Opponent :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  for  the  identity  of  the 
meditation  is  not  ruled  out  by  this  (slight)  variation,  inasmuch 
as  many  more  points  of  similarity  are  in  evidence,  for  instance, 
the  beginning  is  made  with  a  description  of  the  war  between 
the  gods  and  devils,  the  Udgltha  is  introduced  for  the  sake  of 
defeating  the  devils,  the  mention  is  made  of  the  organs  like  the 
organ  of  speech,  resort  is  made  to  the  vital  force  in  the  mouth 
after  decrying  those  organs,  and  the  analogy  of  the  stone  and  a 
lump  of  earth  (smashed  by  being  thrown  at  the  stone)  is  cited 
by  way  of  illustrating  the  destruction  of  the  devils  by  the 


654  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  6 

prowess  of  the  vital  force;  many  other  points  of  similarity  of 
this  kind  are  also  in  evidence  in  both  the  places.  Even  in  the 
Bj-hadaranyaka  we  come  across  an  appositional  use  of  Prana 
with  Udgltha:  “This  indeed  is  also  Udgltha”  (I.  iii.  23).  Hence 
in  the  Chandogya  Upani§ad  also,  the  agency  of  Prana  (in 
singing)  is  to  be  inferred  metaphorically.  From  this  also  follows 
the  identity  of  the  meditations. 

^  5jt  s+ciifcki  m\ 

^  Rather  not  owing  to  a  difference  in  subject- 

matter  even  as  in  such  cases  as  being  higher 

than  the  high. 

7.  Rather  not  owing  to  a  difference  of  subject-matter  even  as 
in  such  cases  as  (meditation  on  the  Udgltha  as)  possessed  of 
the  quality  of  being  higher  than  the  highy  (greater  than  the, 
great). 

Vedantin :  The  identity  of  the  meditations  is  not  certainly 
tenable;  the  reasonable  position  here  is  that  the  meditations  are 
different. 

Why? 

“Owing  to  a  difference  of  prakarawi  (lit.  subject-matter)”, 
that  is  to  say,  “owing  to  a  difference  of  prakrama  (lit.  introduc¬ 
tion) — the  way  the  two  meditations  are  started  with”.  Thus  a 
difference  in  the  manner  of  starting  is  obvious  here.  The 
Chandogya  begins  with,  “Let  one  meditate  on  the  letter  Om  as 
Udgltha”  (I.  i.  1).  Thus  the  subject  introduced  is  the  meditation 
on  Om,  a  letter  forming  a  part  of  the  Udgltha.  Then  it  is 
expounded  as  possessed  of  such  qualities  as  being  the  quintes¬ 
sence.  And  then  that  very  Om,  forming  a  part  of  the  Udgltha  is 
again  alluded  to  in,  “Now  then  starts  a  proximate  elaboration  of 
that  very  letter”  (I.  i.  10),  and  proceeding  through  the  narration 
of  the  war  between  the  gods  and  the  devils  the  text  says,  “They 
meditated  on  Prana  as  the  Udgltha”  (I.  ii.  2).  Now  if  by  the 
word  Udgltha,  occurring  there,  be  meant  the  entire  division  of 
Sama  (song,  that  goes  by  that  name),  and  the  priest  Udgata  be 
meant  as  the  singer  (identified  with  Prapa),  then  the  introduc- 


III.  iii.7] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA 


655 


tion  would  be  contradicted,  and  a  necessity  for  resort  to 
metaphorical  interpretation  would  crop  up.  It  is  proper  that  in 
the  same  context,  conveying  a  single  idea,  the  conclusion  should 
be  in  accordance  with  the  introduction.  Hence  in  this  text  what 
is  enjoined  is  the  superimposition  of  the  idea  of  Praija  on  Om 
forming  a  part  of  the  Udgltha.  But  in  the  Bjrhadarapyaka 
Upani$ad,  there  being  no  reason  to  understand  a  part  of  the 
Udgltha  from  a  use  of  that  word,  it  is  presented  as  a  whole 
(along  with  all  its  parts).  And  even  in  the  text,  “you  chant 
for  us”  (Bjr.  I.  iii.  2),  the  priest  called  Udgata,  who  is  the  singer 
of  that  entire  Udgltha  is  enjoined  to  be  looked  upon  as  Prana. 
Thus  the  manner  of  presentation  is  different.  Although  there, 
in  the  Bfhadaraoyaka,  Prana  is  placed  in  apposition  with 
Udgltha,  yet  this  is  meant  for  demonstrating  the  fact  that 
Pram ,  which  has  been  sought  to  be  shown  as  the  priest 
Udgata,  is  also  the  Self  of  all.  So  this  does  not  lead  to  an  identity 
of  the  two  meditations.  Again,  there  (in  the  Bjrhadaraijyaka 
text),  the  term  Udgltha  is  used  to  indicate  the  whole  of  it,  so 
that  there  is  difference  between  the  two.  It  cannot  be  argued 
that  the  idea  of  Prana  being  the  Udgata  has  to  be  rejected  on 
the  ground  of  impossibility;  for  Prana  is  taught  as  the  Udgata 
for  the  sake  of  meditation  just  like  its  being  taught  as  the 
Udgltha  for  the  same  purpose.  Besides,  it  is  with  the  energy  of 
Prana  that  the  Udgata  sings  the  Udgltha,  so  that  there  is  no 
impossibility.  Thus  it  is  stated  by  the  Upani$ad  in  that  very 
context,  “Indeed  he  chanted  through  speech  and  the  vital  force” 
(Bf.  I  .  iii.  24).  Again,  when  the  intended  meaning  is  understood 
to  be  different  (in  the  two  Upani$ads),  it  is  not  proper  to  decide 
on  an  identity  of  meaning  with  the  help  of  mere  similarity  of 
the  language  of  the  sentences.  An  illustration  of  this  is  found 
in  the  sentences  (in  Purva-Mlmamsa)  about  the  rising  of  the 
moon  and  desire  for  cattle,  where  a  similarity  of  injunction  is 
found  in,  “The  rice  grains  are  to  be  divided  into  three  parts” 
(which  text  deals  with  moon-rise)  and  “with  those  that  form 
the  middle  part,  one  shall  offer  a  cake  in  eight  potsherds  for  fire, 
possessed  of  the  quality  of  a  giver”  (which  sentence  deals  with 
the  desire  for  cattle).  Though  in  the  two  sentences  there  is  a 
similarity  of  injunction,  still  owing  to  a  difference  in  the  intro- 


656 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 


[in.iii.7 


ductory  sentences,  it  is  ascertained  that  in  the  sentence  dealing 
with  moon-rise,  the  idea  implied  is  a  (mere)  change  of  deities, 
whereas  in  the  sentence  dealing  with  desires,  the  injunction  is 
about  a  sacrifice.7  Hence  here  also  the  meditations  differ  owing 
to  a  difference  in  the  introductory  sentences,  “just  as  it  is  in 
the  case  of  Udgltha  possessed  of  the  quality  of  being  higher  than 
the  high  and  greater  than  the  great”.  Although  the  superimposi¬ 
tion  of  the  idea  of  the  supreme  Self  is  similar  in  “Space 
(Brahman)  is  indeed  greater  than  these.  Space  is  the  highest 
goal.  This  is  the  Udgltha  that  is  higher  than  the  high  (Prana), 
and  greater  than  the  great  (Prana),  and  it  is  infinite”  (Ch. 
I.  ix.  1-2),  and  in  the  text  superimposing  the  idea  of  the 
supreme  Self  on  the  sun  and  the  eye,  still  the  meditation 
on  Udgftha  as  possessed  of  the  quality  of  being  higher  and 
greater  than  the  high  and  great  is  different  from  the  meditation 
on  Udgltha  as  possessed  of  the  quality  of  being  established  in 
the  sun  and  the  eye  and  being  possessed  of  golden  beard  etc. 
(Ch.  I.  vi.  7).  But  even  as  within  the  same  branch  of  the  Vedas, 
there  is  no  combination  of  the  features  of  two  different  medita¬ 
tions,  so  also  is  it  the  case  with  different  meditations  occurring 
in  different  branches. 


rj  rRfa  IFU 

(Sameness  follows)  from  (the  sameness  of)  designa¬ 

tion  ^  if  it  be  said  so,  ^cjthat  has  been  answered.  ^ 
However,  ^[-arfq*  that  also  3ffer  exists. 

8.  If  from  the  sameness  of  name ,  ( the  two  meditations  are  held 
to  be  the  same),  that  has  already  been  answered .  But  that 

TThe  Darsa  sacrifice  takes  place  on  the  new-moon  night  (the  fifteenth 
day  of  the  dark  fortnight).  Now  if  by  mistake  it  is  done  on  the  four¬ 
teenth  day,  and  the  moon  rises  afterwards,  the  sacrificer  is  faced  with 
evil  consequences.  To  get  over  this,  the  sacrificer  shall  divide  the  rice 
grains  into  three  parts.  Of  these  the  medium  portion  will  be  offered  to 
Fire,  the  bigger  portion  with  curds  to  Indra,  and  the  smaller  cooked 
into  a  pudding  with  milk  to  Visnu.  But  this  is  not  a  new  sacrifice,  the 
deities  alone  being  changed.  The  text  dealing  with  desire  for  cattle  also 
has  a  similar  ending.  Still  it  is  different  from  the  above. 


III.iii.9]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  657 

(sameness  of  name)  is  met  mth  (even  voith  regard  to  things 
quite  different). 

If  it  be  held  now  that  the  meditation  is  the  same  here  on 
account  of  the  sameness  of  the  name,  it  being  called  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  Udgltha  at  both  the  places,  then  that  too  is  not 
tenable;  for  it  has  been  already  said,  “Rather  not,  owing  to  a 
difference  of  subject-matter  (i.e.  introduction)  even  as  in  such 
cases  as  meditation  on  the  Udgltha  as  possessed  of  the  quality 
of  being  higher  than  the  high  and  greater  than  the  great”  (III. 
iii.  7).  That  applies  here  more  aptly,  inasmuch  as  it  conforms 
to  the  letters  of  the  Upani$ad,  the  name  being  used  in  a  secon¬ 
dary  sense  only  by  common  people  dealing  with  the  subject, 
who  take  their  cue  from  the  mere  occurrence  of  the  word 
Udgltha  in  both  the  places.  Moreover,  this  identity  of  name  is 
met  with  even  in  the  face  of  well-recognized  differences  under¬ 
lying  such  meditations  as  that  on  the  Udgltha  (i.e.  Brahman)  as 
possessed  of  the  qualities  of  being  higher  than  the  high  and 
greater  than  the  great,  where  also  the  single  name  “meditation 
on  Udgltha”  is  used.  Just  as  such  sacrifices  as  Agnihotra,  Darsa- 
punjamasa,  etc.,  which  are  well  known  as  different,  are  seen 
to  be  referred  to  by  the  common  name  Kathaka,  merely  because 
they  are  read  of  in  the  selfsame  book  of  the  Katha  branch  of 
the  Vedas,  so  is  the  case  here.  But  where  no  such  reason  for 
difference  is  met  with,  the  meditations  may  well  be  identical 
as  for  instance  the  meditation  on  Samvarga  (merger),  etc. 

Topic  4:  Specification  of  Om 

Doubt :  In  the  text,  “Let  one  meditate  on  the  letter  Om  (as) 
the  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  1),  we  hear  of  an  appositional  use  of 
Om  and  Udgltha,  from  which  fact  one  of  the  four  alternatives — 
superimposition,  ablation,  identity,  qualification — may  be  accept¬ 
ed  as  the  meaning  of  the  apposition.  So  the  consideration  arises 
above  the  appropriateness  of  any  one  of  these  in  the  present  con¬ 
text.  Of  these,  superimposition  occurs  where  the  idea  of  one  of 
the  two  things  is  superimposed  on  the  idea  of  the  other  even 
while  the  individual  idea  of  the  latter  is  not  sublated;  the  idea 
of  the  thing  on  which  the  idea  of  another  thing  is  superimposed 
42 


658  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  9 

persists  even  when  the  superimposed  idea  of  the  latter  is  in  evi¬ 
dence.  For  instance,  even  when  the  idea  of  Brahman  is  super¬ 
imposed  on  a  name  (e.g.  Om)  the  idea  of  the  name  persists  and 
it  is  not  negated  by  the  idea  of  Brahman;  or  it  is  like  the  super¬ 
imposition  of  the  ideas  of  Vi$ou  and  other  gods  on  images  etc. 
So  also  it  may  be  that  either  the  idea  of  Udgitha  is  superimposed 
here  on  the  letter  Om  or  the  letter  Om  is  superimposed  on 
Udgitha.  Ablation  occurs  where  a  thing  has  got  fastened  on  to 
it  a  deep-rooted,  persistent,  unreal  idea,  and  then  the  true  idea 
dawns  to  drive  away  the  earlier  unreal  idea.  For  instance,  the 
idea  of  Selfhood  persisting  with  regard  to  the  assemblage  of 
body  and  senses  is  driven  away  by  the  subsequent  true  idea  of 
Selfhood  with  regard  to  the  Self  Itself  springing  up  from  the 
(instruction),  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii-xvi);  or  a  confusion 
about  directions  is  removed  by  the  true  idea  of  directions.  So 
it  may  be  that  here  also  either  the  idea  of  the  Udgitha  is  removed 
by  the  idea  of  the  letter  Om  or  the  idea  of  the  letter  Om  is 
removed  by  the  idea  of  the  Udgitha.  Identity  means  that  the 
connotation  and  denotation  of  Om  and  Udgitha  are  the  same. 
Neither  more  nor  less,  as  in  the  case  of  synonymous  terms  like, 
“the  best  among  the  twice-born”,  a  “Brahmana”,  an  “earthly 
god”.  The  adjectival  use8  can  occur  in  the  sense  that  the  letter 
Om,  present  in  all  the  Vedas  and  liable  to  be  understood  as  such, 
is  presented  as  associated  with  the  actions  of  the  Udgata.  Just 
as  somebody  might  say,  “Bring  the  lotus  that  is  blue”,  so  here 
also  the  meaning  is,  “Meditate  on  the  Om  that  is  the  Udgitha”. 
Thus  when  we  think  over  this  sentence  presenting  an  apposition, 
all  these  alternatives  come  to  the  surface. 

Vedantin :  Since  under  this  predicament  one  finds  no  reason 
for  accepting  anyone  of  the  alternatives,  the  aphorism  is  enun¬ 
ciated: 


xf  And  oznt%:  because  of  the  pervasion  (of  all  the  Vedas), 
it  is  proper  (to  qualify  Om  by  Udgitha). 

8  Distinguishing  something  from  other  things  of  the  same  class. 


III.  iii.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  659 

9.  Since  Om  pervades  all  the  Vedas,  it  is  appropriate  to  qualify 
it  by  the  word  Udgttha. 

The  word  “and”,  used  in  place  of  the  word  “but”,  is  meant 
for  ruling  out  the  three  other  alternatives.  The  three  alternatives, 
being  defective  in  the  present  context,  are  rejected,  while  the 
adjectival  alternative  alone  is  accepted  as  it  is  faultless.  Now,  on 
accepting  superimposition,  the  word  denoting  the  idea  that  is 
to  be  superimposed  on  the  other  will  be  subject  to  a  metaphori¬ 
cal  interpretation,9  and  a  result  also  for  it  will  have  to  be 
imagined. 

Opponent :  But  the  result  is  stated  by  the  Upani$ad  itself  in, 
“It  becomes  indeed  the  gratifier  of  desires”  etc.  (Ch.  I.  i.  7). 

Vedantin :  No,  since  it  is  the  result  of  another  thing,  it  being 
the  result  of  the  meditation  on  (Om  as  possessed  of)  the  qual¬ 
ities  of  being  the  fulfiller  of  desires,  and  so  on,  and  not  of  the 
superimposition  of  Udgltha.  As  regards  ablation  also,  the  absence 
of  a  result  is  equally  in  evidence. 

Opponent :  The  result  can  be  the  removal  of  false  ignorance. 

Vedantin:  No,  since  that  (negation  of  Om  or  Udgltha)  is  not 
known  to  lead  to  any  desirable  human  goal.10  And  the  idea  of 
Om  can  never  be  alienated  from  Om,  nor  can  the  idea  of 
Udgltha  from  Udgltha  (since  these  ideas  are  true).  Besides,  this 
passage  does  not  aim  at  establishing  the  nature  of  anything,  it 
being  meant  for  enjoining  a  meditation. 

The  other  alternative,  identity,  too  is  not  appropriate,  for 
in  that  case  the  utterance  of  two  words  (Om  and  Udgltha) 
would  be  useless,  since  one  word  alone  could  convey  the  intend¬ 
ed  idea.  Moreover,  (the  term)  Udgltha  is  not  known  to  imply 
the  idea  of  the  word  Om  as  implied  by  the  letter  O/w,  that  is 
used  along  with  the  acts  of  the  priest  Hota  (of  the  Rg  Veda) 
or  the  priest  Adhvaryu  (of  the  Yajur  Veda).  Nor  is  the  word 
Om  well  known  as  standing  for  the  whole  of  the  second  part 

•But  this  is  inadmissible  when  a  direct  meaning  is  possible,  that  being 
more  authoritative. 

“Cessation  of  ignorance  brings  about  a  cessation  of  evil  and  attainment 
of  bliss.  But  the  negation  of  the  ideas  of  Om  and  Udgltha  by  one  another 
can  bring  no  such  result. 


660  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [III.iii.9 

of  a  Sama  song  which  is  indicated  by  the  word  Udgltha,  in 
which  case  alone  the  Om  could  have  been  a  synonym  for 
Udgitha.  As  a  last  resort,  the  adjectival  alternative  is  accepted, 
“on  account  of  the  pervasion  of  Om”,  that  is  to  say,  on  account 
of  its  being  common  to  all  the  Vedas.  Lest  the  letter  Om  extend¬ 
ing  over  all  the  Vedas  be  taken  up  here,  the  letter  Om  is 
qualified  by  the  word  Udgltha,  so  that  the  Om,  forming  a  part 
of  Udgitha,  may  somehow  be  understood. 

Opponent :  Is  not  a  metaphorical  interpretation  necessary 
even  from  this  point  of  view,  since  the  word  Udgltha  is  meta¬ 
phorically  made  to  imply  a  part  of  itself  (viz  Om )? 

Vedantin :  This  is  quite  so;  but  even  in  the  case  of  a  figure 
of  speech,  there  may  be  an  approximation  to  or  departure  from 
the  primary  meaning.  In  the  case  of  superimposition,  the  idea 
of  something  is  superimposed  on  something  else,  so  that  the 
figure  of  speech  here  involves  a  departure;  whereas  in  the  case 
of  the  adjectival  use,  a  word  denoting  a  whole  is  made  to  imply 
a  part  of  itself,  so  that  the  figure  of  speech  involves  a  proximity; 
for  words  indicating  the  whole  are  seen  to  be  used  with  regard 
to  the  parts  as  well,  as  in  the  case  of  a  cloth  or  a  village.11  Hence 
it  is  flawless  and  appropriate  that  Om,  which  is  common  to  all 
the  Vedas,  should  be  qualified  by  the  term  “Udgitha”  in  the 
text,  “the  letter  Om”. 

Topic  5:  Sameness  of  the  Meditation  on  Prana 

\\\o\\ 

*rf-3rfcT?(  Owing  to  non-difference  of  all,  ^  these  (traits) 
(are  to  be  added)  elsewhere. 

10.  All  ( the  meditations  on  Prana)  being  the  same ,  these  traits 
(found  here  in  one)  are  to  be  added  elsewhere. 

Doubt:  In  the  anecdote  of  Prana,  as  related  both  by  the 
Vajasaneyins  and  the  Chandogas,  it  is  enjoined  that  Prana  is  to 
be  meditated  on  as  possessed  of  the  quality  of  being  the  greatest. 

n  Even  when  a  portion  is  burnt,  people  say,  “The  cloth  is  burnt”,  “The 
village  is  burnt”. 


III.  iii.  10]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  661 

And  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  are  spoken  of  there  as.  possessed 
of  the  attributes  of  being  vasistha  (most  comfortably  accommo¬ 
dated)  etc.12  These  attributes  are  again  ascribed  to  Prana  in  the 
texts  starting  with,  “The  organ  of  speech  said,  ‘That  attribute 
of  being  the  vasitfha  that  I  have  is  yours’  ”  (Bj\  VI.  i.  14).  But 
while  in  other  branches  of  the  Vedas,  for  instance  in  the 
Kau$Itaki  and  others,  the  pre-eminence  of  Prana  is  mentioned 
in  the  anecdotes  of  Prana  in  such  texts  as,  “Now  then,  here  is 
the  ascertainment  of  greatness.  These  gods,  such  as  they  were, 
quarrelled  about  personal  greatness”  (Kau.  II.  14),  such  attri¬ 
butes  as  being  the  steadiest  are  not  mentioned.  So  the  doubt 
arises  here:  Should  these  attributes  of  being  the  steadiest  etc. 
occurring  somewhere  be  added  elsewhere  as  well  or  should  they 
not? 

Opponent :  While  in  this  doubt,  the  acceptable  position  is  that 
they  are  not  to  be  added  to. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  use  of  the  word  “thus”,  for  in  the  respective 
places,  the  thing  to  be  known  (and  meditated  on)  is  presented 
by  using  the  word  “thus”  as  in,  “Similarly,  if  anyone  indeed, 
after  having  known  (Prana)  thus  (as  possessed  of  the  quality 
of  being  the  greatest),  (meditates  on  Prana),  then  he,  through 
his  meditation  on  Prana  as  the  greatest,  (becomes  the  greatest)” 
(Kau.  II.  14).  And  the  word  “thus”  has  a  reference  to  proximate 
things  alone;  so  it  has  no  capacity  to  present  the  attributes  of  a 
similar  nature  mentioned  in  other  branches.  Hence  the  curiosity 
(to  know  what  is  meant  by  “thus”)  has  to  be  satisfied  by  the 
attributes  found  in  its  own  context. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  the  refutation  is  being 
given.  Some  of  these  attributes  that  have  been  spoken  of,  viz 
that  of  being  the  vasistha  and  so  on,  are  to  be  thrown  in  (i.e. 
added)  elsewhere  as  well. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  non-difference  of  all”  (everywhere);  for 
everywhere  we  recognize  the  meditation  of  Prana  as  identical, 
the  anecdote  etc.  of  Prana  being  similar.  And  when  the  medita- 


12  An  attractive  speaker  lives  happily. 


662  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [m.  iii.  10 

tion  is  the  same,  why  should  not  these  attributes  mentioned  at 
some  place  be  added  elsewhere? 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  said  that  the  word  “thus”,  wherever 
it  may  occur,  indicates  that  the  sets  of  attributes  in  those 
respective  places,  are  to  be  understood  separately? 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this  the  answer  is:  Although  by 
the  word  “thus”,  occurring  in  the  Kau$Itaki-Brahmaija,  the 
set  of  attributes  mentioned  in  the  Vajasaneyi-Brahmaija  are  not 
referred  to,  they  being  far  removed  from  it,  yet  by  the  word 
“thus”,  occurring  in  the  Vajasaneyi-Brahmana,  in  the  course  of 
that  very  meditation  (on  Praria ),  all  these  attributes  are  surely 
intimated;  and  so  the  set  of  attributes,  even  though  they  be 
restricted  to  the  selfsame  meditation  in  another  branch  (viz 
Vajasaneyi)  cannot  be  distinguished  from  the  set  in  one’s  own 
branch  (viz  Kau$Itaki).  And  such  an  interpretation  will  not 
lead  to  the  defects  of  imagining  something  not  spoken  of  by 
the  Vedas  and  rejecting  something  enjoined  by  them;  for  the 
attributes  even  though  they  be  heard  of  in  one  branch,  become 
acceptable  everywhere,  since  the  possessor  of  the  attributes  (viz 
meditation  on  Praria)  is  the  same.  For  if  Devadatta  is  well  known 
in  his  native  land  for  his  qualities  of  valour  etc.,  he  does  not 
become  alienated  from  these  qualities  even  when  he  goes  to 
another  country  where  the  people  are  not  cognisant  of  his 
qualities  of  valour  etc.  And  as  from  better  acquaintance,  those 
qualities  of  Devadatta  can  come  to  be  recognized  in  that  country 
as  well,  so  also  as  a  result  of  better  knowledge,  the  attributes 
to  be  meditated  on  in  one  branch  come  to  be  added  to  the 
meditation  in  another  branch.  Hence  the  attributes  associated 
with  the  selfsame  principal  entity  have  to  be  added  in  every 
other  branch  as  well,  although  they  are  mentioned  in  one  place 
only. 

Topic  6:  Combination  and  Non-combination  of  Attributes 

of  Brahman 

Doubt :  In  the  texts  presenting  the  real  nature  of  Brahman  a 
few  only  of  such  characteristics  of  Brahman  as  of  being  natu¬ 
rally  bliss  itself,  impartite  consciousness,  omnipresent,  Self  of  all, 
and  so  on,  are  met  with  here  and  there.  With  regard  to  them 


III.  iu.  12]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  663 

the  doubt  arises:  Are  only  those  attributes  of  Brahman  such  as 
bliss  etc.  to  be  accepted  in  a  particular  place  just  as  they  are 
specifically  mentioned  there,  or  are  all  the  attributes  to  be 
accepted  everywhere? 

Opponent :  Under  such  circumstances,  the  obvious  conclusion 
is  that  the  attributes  are  to  be  accepted  just  as  they  appear 
separately  under  the  different  contexts. 

Vedantin :  To  this  the  reply  is: 

3TFFSRFT:  5OTTPI \\\\\\ 

Bliss  and  other  characteristics  sraTfflFq'  of  the 
principal  entity  (are  to  be  combined). 

1L  Bliss  and  other  characteristics  of  the  principal  entity  (i.e. 
Brahman)  are  to  be  combined . 

All  such  characteristics  of  Brahman  as  bliss  etc.  are  to  be 
understood  as  belonging  to  It  everywhere  (in  all  the  contexts). 

Why? 

Precisely  because  of  non-difference  in  all  the  places;  for  that 
very  principal  entity,  Brahman,  is  equally  the  substantive  every¬ 
where.  Hence  the  attributes  of  Brahman  exist  (collectively) 
everywhere,  in  accordance  with  the  illustration  of  the  valour  of 
Devadatta  shown  under  the  previous  topic. 

Opponent :  In  that  case  all  such  characteristics  as  “having  joy 
as  the  head”  will  also  get  mixed  up  everywhere.  Thus  in  the 
Taittirlya  Upani§ad,  after  introducing  the  self  constituted  by 
bliss,  it  is  said,  “of  him  joy  is  verily  the  head,  enjoyment  is  the 
right  side,  hilarity  is  the  left  side,  bliss  is  the  Self  (i.e.  trunk), 
Brahman  is  the  tail  that  stabilizes”  (II.  v.  1). 

Vedantin :  Hence  comes  the  answer: 

14^*1  %  ^  WWW 

fipi-fal  <^-3nf^-3nTTfH: There  is  no  addition  of  such  attributes 
as  having  joy  as  the  head  and  so  on;  because 
augmentation  and  depletion  ^  (occur)  in  a  context  of  duality. 


66 4  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  [III.  iii.  12 

12.  Attributes  such  as  having  joy  as  the  head  and  so  on  are 
not  to  be  added  everywhere,  since  (they  have)  degrees  of 
intensity  and  feebleness ,  (which  are)  possible  in  ji  context  of 
difference  (i.e.  duality). 

The  attributes  of  “having  joy  as  the  head”  and  so  on,  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  Taittiriya  Upani$ad,  are  not  to  be  added  else¬ 
where,  since  joy,  enjoyment,  hilarity,  and  bliss  are  perceived 
to  be  of  different  degrees  of  intensity  or  feebleness  in  relation 
to  one  another  and  in  respect  of  the  (different)  enjoyers. 
Intensity  or  feebleness  co-exist  only  with  difference,  whereas 
Brahman  is  without  any  difference,  as  is  known  from  such 
texts  as,  “one  only  without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1).  And  it 
was  taught  by  us  under  the  aphorism,  “He  who  is  full  of  Bliss 
is  Brahman  on  account  of  repetition”  (I.  i.  12),  that  these  attri¬ 
butes  of  “having  joy  as  head”  etc.  do  not  belong  to  Brahman, 
but  to  the  blissful  sheath.  Moreover,  these  are  imagined  as  means 
for  concentrating  the  mind  on  the  supreme  Brahman,  but  they 
are  not  meant  for  realization  (as  actual  characteristics).  While 
this  is  their  purpose,  this  is  all  the  more  reason  why  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  “having  joy  as  the  head”  and  so  on  are  not  to  be  added 
everywhere.  But  admitting  for  the  sake  of  argument  that  these 
are  attributes  of  Brahman,  the  teacher  (Vyasa)  has  only  shown 
the  reason  why  the  attributes  of  “having  joy  as  head”  and  so 
on,  are  not  to  be  added  elsewhere.  This  reasoning  is  to  be  applied 
to  other  attributes  also  that  undoubtedly  belong  to  Brahman, 
and  are  enjoined  for  meditation,  such  for  instance  as,  samyad - 
vama  (resort  of  all  blessings — Ch.  IV.  xv.  2)  and  satyakama 
(having  inevitable  desire — Ch.  III.  xiv.  2).  Even  though  the 
Brahman  to  be  meditated  on  is  the  same  in  all  of  them,  yet  the 
meditations  differ  according  to  the  different  contexts,  and  as 
such  the  attributes  found  in  one  are  not  to  be  transferred  to 
another.  Just  as  the  two  wives  of  a  king  may  adore  him  in  two 
ways — one  with  a  chowrie  (fly-whisk)  and  the  other  with  an 
umbrella,  and  the  behaviour  of  the  king  may  differ  there  accord¬ 
ing  to  the  mode  of  adoration,  although  the  person  adored  is 
the  same,  so  also  is  the  case  here.  The  possession  of  intensive  or 
feeble  attributes  is  possible  in  the  case  of  the  qualified  Brahman 


Ill.iii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  665 

alone,  with  regard  to  whom  dualistic  ideas  persist,  but  not  so 
in  the  case  of  the  unqualified  supreme  Brahman.  Hence  the 
attributes  of  “having  inevitable  desires”  etc.  which  are  heard 
of  in  particular  contexts  are  not  to  be  added  everywhere.  This 
is  the  idea. 


^  c^iHPTig;  11*311 

The  other  (characteristics)  g  however  (are  to  be  under¬ 
stood)  apr-qmiiqRt  on  account  of  identity  of  purport. 

13.  But  the  other  characteristics  are  to  be  understood  every¬ 
where  on  account  of  identity  of  purport. 

But  all  the  other  attributes  like  bliss,  which  are  spoken  of  for 
propounding  the  real  nature  of  Brahman,  are  to  be  understood 
everywhere,  since  they  have  an  identity  of  purport,  that  is  to 
say,  the  Brahman,  which  possesses  these  attributes  and  which 
they  seek  to  establish,  is  the  same.  Hence  there  is  a  difference 
(between  the  two  groups  of  attributes),  inasmuch  as  these 
(latter)  are  meant  simply  for  the  attainment  of  knowledge  (and 
not  for  meditation). 

Topic  7:  Purusa  as  the  Highest  in  Katha 

3TTBTFTR' 

(Katha  verses  I.  iii.  10  etc.  are)  srr-^TPTPT  meant  for  deep 
meditation  (on  Puru§a),  (and  not  for  stating  the  relative  posi¬ 
tions  of  others)  as  that  serves  no  purpose. 

14.  What  is  mentioned  in  the  Katha  Upanisad  is  meant  for 
deep  meditation  on  Purusa ,  (and  not  for  stating  any  gradation ), 
as  that  serves  no  purpose. 

Doubt :  In  the  Katha  Upani§ad,  the  start  is  made  with,  “The 
sense-objects  are  higher  than  the  senses,  and  the  mind  is  higher 
than  the  sense-objects”  (I.  iii.  10);  and  then  it  is  said,  “There  is 
nothing  higher  than  Puru$a.  He  is  the  culmination,  He  is  the 


666  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.14 

highest  goal”  (I.  iii.  11).  Here  the  doubt  arises  whether  all  those 
things  starting  with  sense-objects  are  propounded  to  be  each 
higher  than  the  preceding  one,  or  it  is  propounded  that  Puru$a 
is  the  highest  of  all. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  idea  gained  is  that  each  of  these 
is  expounded  here  to  be  higher  (than  its  predecessor);  for  the 
Upani$ad  talks  of  them  as  “such  a  one  is  higher  than  such 
another”,  and  “such  another  is  higher  than  still  another”,  and 
so  on. 

Objection :  If  many  objects  are  propounded  to  be  (succes¬ 
sively)  higher,  it  will  result  in  splitting  the  unity  of  idea  (con¬ 
veyed  by  a  single  sentence). 

Opponent :  That  is  no  fault,  since  it  can  well  be  that  there 
are  many  sentences.  For  it  is  but  proper  that  these  sentences 
should  be  many,  so  that  they  may  speak  (separately)  of  many 
things  possessed  of  superiority.  Hence  here  we  have  a  propound¬ 
ing  of  the  superiority  of  each  of  these  objects  individually. 

Veddntin  :  Such  being  the  conclusion,  we  say  that  the  reason¬ 
able  position  is  that  Puru§a  is  proved  to  be  superior  to  all  of 
them,  but  not  that  each  one  of  the  objects  is  propounded  to  be 
higher  (than  the  earlier  one). 

Why? 

“As  that  serves  no  purpose”,  inasmuch  as  no  objective  is  either 
seen  or  mentioned  in  the  Upanisads  as  being  fulfilled  by  proving 
the  other  things  to  have  any  relative  superiority,  whereas,  when 
it  is  established  that  Purusa  (the  infinite  Being),  who  is  free 
from  all  evil,  is  superior  to  the  organs,  the  achievement  of  libera¬ 
tion  stands  out  as  a  discernible  fact.  In  support  of  this  is  the 
Upani$adic  text,  “one  becomes  free  from  the  jaws  of  death  by 
knowing  that  which  is . . .  ever  constant”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  15).  More¬ 
over,  by  denying  anything  higher  than  Puru§a  (I.  iii.  11), 
through  the  use  of  such  words  as  “culmination”  (ibid.),  the  text 
evinces  a  preference  for  Puru$a,  and  thereby  it  also  makes  it 
obvious  that  the  mention  of  a  chain  of  graded  things  is  meant 
for  explaining  Purusa  alone.  “For  deep  meditation”  means,  “for 
the  sake  of  complete  realization  through  meditation”,  since 
meditation  is  taught  here  only  as  a  means  for  complete  enlight¬ 
enment,  but  not  as  an  objective  by  itself. 


III.  iii.  16] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 

anpiwww  \\Vtii\ 


667 


xf  Also  because  of  the  word  Self. 

IS.  And  (this  must  be  the  conclusion)  on  account  of  the  use 
of  the  'word  Self. 

That  this  mention  of  the  chain  of  successive  superiority  (over 
things)  starting  from  the  sense-organs,  is  meant  for  realizing 
Puru$a  is  proved  from  the  further  fact  that  the  Puru§a  under 
discussion  is  spoken  of  as  the  Self  in,  “He  is  hidden  in  all 
beings,  and  hence  He  does  not  appear  as  the  Self  (of  all).  But 
by  the  seers  of  subtle  things,  He  is  seen  through  a  fine  and 
pointed  intellect”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  12).  And  from  this  it  can  be 
understood  that  the  rest  are  not  meant  to  be  spoken  of  as  the 
Self.  That  Puru$a  Himself  is  shown  to  be  inscrutable  and  yet 
comprehensible  by  the  fully  purified  mind.  It  is  for  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  that  Puru$a  that  meditation  is  enjoined  in,  “The  discrim¬ 
inating  man  should  merge  the  organ  of  speech  into  the  mind” 
etc.  (Ka.  I.  iii.  13).  All  this  was  explained  under  the  aphorism, 
“If  it  be  said  that  in  some  recensions  even  the  inferred  entity 
(Pradhana)  is  also  mentioned,  we  say  no”  etc.  (I.  iv.  1).  Thus 
it  is  noticed  how  variously  and  abundantly  the  Upani$ads  have 
for  their  main  purport  Puru$a  and  nothing  else.  Moreover,  when 
it  is  declared,  “The  man  attains  the  end  of  the  road  (i.e.  goal 
of  his  journey),  which  is  the  highest  place  of  Vi§ou”  (Ka.  I. 
iii.  9),  the  curiosity  arises  as  to  what  exactly  is  that  “highest 
place  of  Vi$ou”  which  is  “at  the  end  of  the  road”.  In  response 
to  this  are  enumerated  the  sense-organs  etc.  serially.  So  from 
this  it  is  clear  that  this  effort  is  made  for  the  realization  of  the 
“highest  place”. 

Topic  8:  The  Supreme  Self  in  Aitareya 

n^u 

3TR*-^:  The  supreme  Self  is  to  be  understood  (in  the 
Aitareya  Upanisad)  as  elsewhere  because  of  what 

follows. 


668  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  16-17 

16.  The  supreme  Self  is  to  be  understood  in  the  Aitateytt 
Upani$ady  just  as  elsewhere  (in  other  texts  about  creation ),  on 
account  of  the  subsequent  qualification . 

Doubt :  In  the  Aitareya  Upanisad  it  is  mentioned,  “In  the 
beginning  this  was  but  the  absolute  Self  alone.  There  was 
nothing  else  whatsoever  that  winked.  He  thought,  ‘Let  Me 
create  the  worlds’.  He  created  these  worlds,  viz  ambhas  (region 
beyond  heaven),  Marici  (sky)  mar  a  (earth)  dpah  (nether 
regions)”  etc.  (I.  i.  1-2).  With  regard  to  this  the  doubt  arises, 
whether  the  supreme  Self  Itself  is  here  referred  to  by  the  word 
Self  or  some  one  else.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  The  supreme  Self  cannot  be  referred  to  here  by 
the  word  Self. 

Why? 

On  account  of  what  is  discernible  from  the  trend  of  the 
sentence. 

Objection :  Is  not  the  connected  sequence  of  the  sentence 
seen  to  be  more  in  favour  of  the  supreme  Self,  since  the  assertion 
is  made  about  the  oneness  of  the  Self  before  creation  and 
because  of  the  mention  of  creation  after  deliberation? 

Opponent:  We  say  no,  because  this  narration  is  about  the 
creation  of  the  worlds.  If  the  supreme  Self  were  to  be  accepted 
as  the  creator,  the  creation  of  the  great  fine  elements  should 
have  been  stated  first,  whereas  the  creation  of  the  worlds  is 
narrated  here  first.  The  worlds  are  only  peculiar  arrangements 
of  the  elements.  So  also  ambhas  etc.  are  merely  the  worlds  that 
are  spoken  of  in  such  sentences  as,  “That  which  is  beyond 
heaven  is  ambhas ”  (Ai.  I.  i.  2).  And  from  the  Vedas  and  Sm|tis 
it  is  gathered  that  the  creation  of  the  worlds  is  the  act  of  some 
divine  being  under  the  direction  of  God.  Thus  there  occurs 
the  Upanisadic  text:  “In  the  beginning  this  universe  was  but 
the  Self  (Virat)  of  the  human  form”  etc.  (Bj\  I.  iv.  1).  And 
there  is  also  the  Smfti  text,  “He  is  the  first  embodied  Being,  He 
is  called  Puru§a.  He  is  the  first  creator  of  all  beings,  born  first 
as  Brahma”.  The  followers  of  the  Aitareya  branch  also  mention 
in  an  earlier  context,  in  the  text,  “Then  follows  the  creation 
from  semen.  The  gods  are  the  semen  (i.e.  products)  of  Prajapati 


III.  iii.  16-17] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


669 


(Virat)”  (Ai.  Br.  II.  i.  3.1),  that  the  diverse  creation  is  an  act  of 
Prajapati.  The  word  Self  is  also  found  to  be  used  for  him,  as  in, 
“In  the  beginning  this  universe  was  but  the  Self  (Virat)  of  the 
human  form”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  1).  The  assertion  of  his  unity  also 
becomes  appropriate  when  contrasted  with  the  diversity  which 
is  his  product.  And  his  deliberation  also  is  justifiable  because  he 
is  admitted  to  be  conscious.  Moreover,  the  class  of  particular 
activities,  well  known  in  the  case  of  the  different  common  souls, 
are  met  with  here  in  such  sentences  as,  “For  them  he  brought 
a  cow, ...  to  them  he  brought  a  horse, ...  to  them  he  brought 
a  man,  ...They  said”  (Ai.  I.  ii.  2-3).  Hence  the  Self  mentioned 
here  must  be  some  entity  having  some  limitations. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  “The  supreme 
Self  is  to  be  understood  here  by  the  word  Self,  as  elsewhere”. 
Just  as  the  supreme  Self  is  understood  in  other  Upani$adic  texts 
about  creation,  such  as  “From  that  Brahman,  which  is  the  Self, 
was  produced  space”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  or  as  the  inmost  Self  Itself 
is  meant  by  the  use  of  the  word  Self  in  common  parlance,  so 
also  must  be  the  case  here.  But  the  Self  with  limitations  must 
be  the  meaning  in  such  texts  as  that  beginning  with,  “In  the 
beginning  this  universe  was  but  the  Self  (Virat)”  (Br.  I.  iv.  1), 
where  occur  such  other  qualifying  terms  as  “of  a  human  form” 
(ibid.).  Here,  however,  the  subsequent  qualification  that  is  met 
with,  is  itself  conducive  to  the  acceptance, of  the  supreme  Self, 
for  instance,  “He  thought,  ‘Let  Me  create  the  worlds’  ”  (Ai.  I. 
i.  1),  “He  created  these  worlds”  (Ai.  I.  i.  2),  and  so  on.  Hence 
the  reasonable  position  is  to  accept  the  supreme  Self. 


(It  follows)  from  the  trend  of  the  sentences  (that 
the  supreme  Self  is  not  meant)  ^  if  such  be  the  conten¬ 
tion,  prRj;  it  must  be  so  because  of  definite  state¬ 

ment. 


17.  If  it  be  objected  that  it  follows  from  the  trend  of  the 
sentences  that  the  Supreme  Self  is  not  meant ,  (the  reply  is  that) 
it  must  be  so  because  of  the  definite  statemem  (that  the  Self 
alone  existed  in  the  beginning ). 


670  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  16-17 

It  was  argued  that  from  the  trend  of  the  context  it  follows 
that  the  supreme  Self  is  not  meant.  That  has  to  be  refuted.  “It 
must  be  so  because  of  the  definite  statement” — the  acceptance 
of  the  supreme  Self  must  be  appropriate  here. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  definite  statement”;  for  the  definite  state¬ 
ment  about  the  oneness  of  the  Self  before  creation  becomes 
appropriate  only  if  the  supreme  Self  is  meant,  else  it  will  become 
inappropriate.  As  for  the  sentence  about  creation  of  the  worlds, 
we  shall  interpret  it  as  meaning  the  creation  (of  the  worlds) 
after  the  creation  of  the  great  elements,  as  is  well  known  in 
other  Upani$ads.  As  we  interpreted  the  sentence,  “That 
Brahman  created  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  to  mean  that  the  creation 
(of  fire)  was  after  the  creation  of  space  and  air  well  known  in 
other  Upani$ads,  so  also  it  can  be  done  here.  For  any  speciality 
mentioned  in  one  Upani$ad  with  regard  to  the  same  subject 
has  to  be  added  to  it  in  the  other  Upani$ads  as  well.  As 
for  the  ascription  of  a  particular  type  of  behaviour  to  the 
Self  in  such  sentences  as,  “He  brought  a  cow  to  them”, 
that  too  has  to  be  understood  in  a  way  that  is  conducive 
to  the  ascertainment  of  the  idea  sought  to  be  imparted. 
For  it  cannot  certainly  be  held  that  the  mere  narration  of  this 
anecdote,  as  a  whole,  is  the  only  purport,  since  that  does  not 
lead  to  any  human  goal.  But  in  fact  the  intended  purport  here 
is  the  identity  of  the  (individual)  Self  with  Brahman.  And  thus 
it  is  that  after  imparting  instruction  about  the  creation  of  the 
worlds  and  their  presiding  deities  like  Fire,  and  then  teaching 
about  the  sense-organs  and  the  body  as  their  seats,  the  text 
shows  how  the  creator  Himself  thought,  “How  indeed  can  it  be 
there  without  Me”  (Ai.  I.  iii.  11),  and  then  He  entered  into 
this  body:  “Having  split  up  this  end  (on  the  head  where  the 
parting  of  the  hair  occurs),  He  entered  through  this  door” 
(Ai.  I.  iii.  12).  Again  the  text  says  that  after  taking  the  activities 
of  the  organs  into  consideration  thus,  “If  utterance  is  done  by 
the  organ  of  speech,  smelling  by  the  sense  of  smell”  (Ai.  I.  iii. 
11),  and  then  having  reflected,  “What  then  am  I?”  (ibid.),  “He 
entered  through  this  door,  having  split  up  this  end  (at  the 
parting  of  hair  on  the  crown  of  the  head)”  (Ai.  I.  iii.  12),  where 


III.  iii.  16-17]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  671 

the  identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  is  categorically  asserted 
by  saying  “He  realized  this  very  Puru$a  as  Brahman,  the  most 
pervasive”  (x\i.  I.  iii.  13).  Later  on  too,  this  very  fact  of  the 
identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  is  asserted  by  starting  with, 
“This  one  is  the  inferior  Brahman;  this  is  Indra”  etc.  (Ai.  III. 
i.  3),  where  all  the  things  within  the  world  of  duality,  inclusive 
of  the  great  elements,  are  enumerated  one  after  the  other,  and 
then  the  conclusion  is  made  with,  “All  these  have  Consciousness 
as  the  giver  of  their  reality;  all  these  are  impelled  by  Conscious¬ 
ness.  The  universe  has  Consciousness  as  its  eye,  and  Conscious¬ 
ness  as  its  end.  Consciousness  is  Brahman”  (Ai.  III.  i.  3).  Hence 
it  goes  without  any  contradiction  that  the  supreme  Self  is  meant 
here. 

The  other  interpretation  of  the  aphorisms  beginning  with 
“ atmagrkntiritaravaduttardt ”  is  this: 

WWW 

16 .  The  Self  is  to  be  understood  (in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad ), 
just  as  in  the  other  (Brhadaranyaka)  Upani$ady  because  of  the 
subsequent  ( instruction  about  identity). 

Doubt :  In  the  Byhadaraoyaka  Upanisad  it  is  said,  “Which  is 
the  Self?  This  infinite  entity  (Puru$a)  that  is  identified  with 
the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  organs,  the  self-effulgent  light 
within  the  heart  (intellect)*”  (By.  IV.  iii.  7),  where  the  start 
is  made  with  the  word  Self,  and  then  by  proving  that  very  Self 
to  be  free  from  all  attachments,  it  is  definitely  stated  that  the 
Self  is  identified  with  Brahman.  The  conclusion  is  also  made 
accordingly:  “That  great  birthless  Self  is  undecaying,  immortal, 
undying,  fearless,  and  Brahman”  (By.  IV.  iv.  25).  But  in  the 
Chandogya  Upani$ad  the  start  is  made  thus,  “O  amiable  one, 
in  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  Existence,  one  without  a 
second”  (IV.  ii.  1),  where  the  word  Self  is  not  used,  but  the 
identity  (of  the  individual  and  Brahman)  is  taught  at  the  end 
in  the  words,  “That  thou  art”  (VI.  viii.  7).  Now  the  doubt 
arises,  whether  these  two  scriptural  texts  have  the  same  meaning 
or  not. 


672  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  in.  16-17 

Opponent :  The  acceptable  position  is  that  they  have  different 
gleanings,  since  the  texts  are  dissimilar.  For  in  a  case  of  textual 
divergence,  it  is  not  proper  to  accept  a  similarity  of  meaning, 
since  the  meaning  should  be  understood  in  accordance  with  the 
scripture.  As  for  the  Bj*hadaraoyaka,  it  is  obvious  from  the  use 
of  the  word  Self  in  the  beginning  that  the  instruction  is  about 
the  reality  of  the  Self.  But  since  in  the  Chandogya  the  start  is 
made  in  a  different  way,  there  is  a  dissimilarity  in  the  instruc¬ 
tion. 

Vedantin :  Was  it  not  pointed  out  that  even  the  Chandogya 
contains  instruction  about  the  identity  of  the  (individual)  Self 
and  Brahman  at  the  end? 

Opponent :  You  said  so,  to  be  sure;  but  since  the  conclusion 
must  accord  with  the  commencement,  it  can  be  considered  that 
this  is  only  a  fanciful  conceit  of  identity. 

Vedantin :  That  being  the  position,  it  is  said:  “The  (supreme) 
Self  is  to  be  understood”  even  by  the  Chandogas  in  their  text, 
“O  amiable  one,  in  the  beginning  all  this  was  but  Existence,  one 
without  a  second”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  1);  “Just  as  in  the  other 
Upani$ad” — Just  as  the  (supreme)  Self  is  implied  in  the 
Bfhadaraijyaka  text,  “What  is  the  Self?”  (IV.  iii.  7),  so  also  is 
it  here. 

Why? 

“Because  of  the  subsequent  instruction  of  identity”. 

aMSlfefd  II?\9II 

17.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  rule  about  the  conformity  of  the 
commencement  and  the  conclusion  leads  to  the  idea  that  the 
Self  is  not  meant ,  then  ive  say  that  it  must  be  so  because  of  the 
definite  statement. 

Opponent :  It  was  pointed  out  that  the  conclusion  has  to 
conform  to  the  beginning;  and  since  the  word  Self  is  not  used 
in  the  beginning,  the  Self  is  not  meant.  How  would  you  avoid 
that  difficulty? 

Vedantin :  That  is  being  stated:  “It  must  be  so  because  of  the 
definite  statement”.  On  account  of  the  definite  statement,  the 
reasonable  position  here  is  that  the  Self  is  meant.  To  explain: 


IILiii.  18] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


673 


It  is  asserted  in  the  text,  “That  by  knowing  which  the  unheard 
becomes  heard,  the  unthought  becomes  thought,  and  the  un¬ 
known  becomes  known”  (Ch.  VI.  i.  1),  that  everything  becomes 
known  when  the  One  is  known;  and  then  to  expound  this,  the 
Upani$ad  starts  with,  “O  amiable  one,  in  the  beginning”  etc. 
That  assertion  becomes  established  if  the  (supreme)  Self  is  meant 
(in  the  text  under  discussion);  for  else  this  Self,  that  is  the 
supreme  entity,  remains  unknown,  so  that  the  knowledge  of  all 
arising  from  the  knowledge  of  One  remains  unaccomplished. 
Hence  it  is  only  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  assertion  of  the 
identity  (of  the  Self  and  Existence)  that  one  can  reconcile  all 
such  facts  in  the  Cbandogya  Upani$ad  as  the  assertion  of  one¬ 
ness  before  creation,  reference  to  the  individual  being  by  the 
word  Self,  statement  of  the  attainment  of  the  state  of  that  Self 
in  sleep,  and  the  definite  assertion,  “That  thou  art”,  made  again 
and  again  in  response  to  (repeated)  inquiry;  but  not  so  if  the 
identity  be  merely  a  fanciful  conceit.  Besides,  the  argument 
about  the  concurrence  of  the  conclusion  with  the  commence¬ 
ment  should  not  be  raised  here,  for  neither  any  statement  nor 
any  non-statement  of  the  Self  is  in  evidence  in  the  beginning. 
And  a  prelude  in  a  general  form  cannot  be  contradicted  by 
any  special  statement  in  the  complementary  portion*  since  a 
general  statement  raises  expectations  about  the  particulars.  More¬ 
over,  the  meaning  of  the  word,  “Existence”,  when  fully 
considered,  cannot  be  other  than  the  supreme  Self,  since  all 
other  things  are  unreal  by  reasons  of  having  their  origin  in 
speech  etc.  (B.  S.  II.  i.  14).  Even  difference  in  scriptural  readings 
(i.e.  forms  of  sentences)  cannot  give  rise  to  a  difference  in 
purport,  since  no  such  difference  of  meaning  is  in  evidence  in 
the  case  of  such  sentences  as,  “You  fetch  this  vessel”  and  “This 
vessel,  you  fetch”.  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  although  the 
process  of  expounding  may  differ  in  passages  of  this  class,  the 
thing  expounded  does  not  differ. 

Topic  9:  Acamana  and  Meditation  on  Prana 


Since  (the  rinsing  of  the  mouth,  acamana,  is) 
43 


674  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  18 

mentioned  as  a  duty  (already  known),  (it  occurs  here) 
in  connection  with  a  new  injunction. 

18.  Since  acamana  is  mentioned  as  a  duty  already  recognized , 
it  occurs  (in  the  Upmisad)  in  connection  'with  a  fresh  injunction 
(of  meditation  on  Prana). 

Doubt :  In  the  anecdote  of  Prana  (vital  force),  the  Chandogas 
as  well  as  the  Vajasaneyins  mention  that  all  that  is  food  to  the 
creatures  right  down  to  the  dogs  is  the  food  of  the  vital  force 
(Pritya),  and  then  they  mention  water  as  its  cloth.  Subsequently 
the  Chandogas  have  this  text,  “It  is  for  this  reason  indeed  that 
people  when  eating  cover  it  up  with  water  just  before  and  after 
eating”18  (Ch.  V.  ii.  2).  And  the  Vajasaneyins  have  this  text, 
“Therefore  wise  men  who  are  versed  in  the  Vedas  sip  a  little 
water  just  before  and  after  eating.  They  regard  it  as  removing 
the  nakedness  of  the  vital  force”  (Bj\  VI.  i.  14);  “Hence  men 
possessed  of  this  knowledge  shall  sip  a  little  water  while  sitting 
for  a  meal  and  sip  a  little  water  after  finishing  the  meal.  While 
doing  so  they  shall  think  that  they  are  removing  the  nakedness 
of  this  one  (the  vital  force)”  (ibid.).  Here  two  acts  are  met 
with,  viz  sipping  of  water  and  thinking  of  the  removal  of 
Prana’s  nakedness.  Now  it  is  to  be  considered  whether  both 
these  acts  are  enjoined,  or  merely  sipping  or  the  thinking  of  the 
removal  of  Prana’s  nakedness.  What  should  be  the  conclusion 
then? 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  is  that  both  the  acts  are  enjoined. 

Why? 

Since  both  these  are  obvious  from  the  text,  and  since  both 
these  are  fit  to  be  enjoined  as  they  are  unique  duties  (met  with 
here  for  the  first  time).  Or  it  may  be  that  the  sipping  alone  is 
enjoined,  since  the  imperative  case-ending  about  it  is  clear: 
“Hence  a  man  possessed  of  this  knowledge  shall  sip  a  little  water 
while  sitting  for  meal,  and  sip  a  little  water  after  finishing  the 
meal”.  And  the  declaration  of  the  removal  of  nakedness  is  meant 
only  for  the  eulogy  of  that  act  (of  sipping). 

““The  sipping  of  a  little  water  from  the  palm  of  the  hand  serves  as  a 
cloth  for  Prana” — this  is  how  it  is  to  be  fancied. 


III.  iii.  18)  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  675 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say  that  it  cannot  be 
logically  upheld  that  this  is  an  injunction  about  sipping,  since 
the  text  only  alludes  to  this  duty  that  is  already  enjoined  else¬ 
where.  This  act  of  sipping,  as  it  is  already  known  from  the 
Smjti  as  an  act  meant  for  purification,  is  merely  alluded  to  here. 

Opponent :  Should  not  this  (very)  Vedic  text  form  the  basis 
of  that  Smfti? 

Vedantin :  The  reply  is,  no,  since  the  subject-matters  differ. 
The  Smjrti,  concerned  with  a  general  subject-matter,  enjoins 
sipping  of  water  for  all  persons,  and  this  act  is  calculated  to 
purify  them.  But  the  Vedic  text  occurs  in  a  context  of  medita¬ 
tion  on  Prana ;  if  it  should  at  all  enjoin  a  rule  about  the  sipping 
of  water,  it  can  at  best  do  so  only  in  connection  with  that 
alone.  And  as  between  a  Vedic  text  and  a  Smjrti  text,  no  one 
thinks  of  establishing  a  relationship  of  the  source  and  its  subse¬ 
quent  development,  when  they  deal  with  different  subject- 
matters.  It  cannot  be  held  that  this  Vedic  text  enjoins  some 
unique  rule  about  the  sipping  of  water  in  connection  with  the 
meditation  on  Prana ,  for  it  is  recognized  to  be  the  already  known 
sipping  commonly  resorted  to  by  all  men.  For  this  very  reason 
too  it  is  not  an  injunction  about  both.  Moreover,  if  both  are 
enjoined,  it  will  lead  to  a  splitting  of  the  unity  of  idea  (that 
each  sentence  has).  Hence  after  referring  to  the  already  known 
fact  of  sipping  water  by  people  before  and  after  partaking  of 
their  meals,  the  present  text  imparts  in  the  sentence,  “While 
doing  so,  they  think  that  they  are  removing  the  nakedness  of 
this  one”  (Bjr.  VI.  i.  14),  a  new  injunction  about  thinking  (or 
fancying)  in  connection  with  the  meditation  on  Prana  of  the 
removal  of  the  nakedness  of  Prdria  with  the  water  used  for  the 
sipping.  Besides,  it  is  not  proper  to  hold  that  this  statement 
about  the  removal  of  the  nakedness  is  meant  as  a  eulogy  for 
the  sipping,  since  the  sipping  is  not  a  matter  for  injunction 
here,  and  since  the  imagination  about  the  removal  of  nakedness 
appears  on  its  own  right  as  the  subject-matter  of  the  injunc¬ 
tion.  It  cannot  also  be  argued  that  from  such  a  point  of  view 
the  same  sipping  will  come  to  serve  two  purposes,  viz  that  of 
purification  and  of  a  garment;  for  these  are  admitted  to  be  two 
different  acts,  inasmuch  as  the  sipping  as  an  act  in  itself  is 


676  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [  III.  iii.  18 

admitted  to  be  meant  for  the  purification  of  a  man,  while  the 
imagination  of  the  water,  used  by  him  for  the  purification,  as 
a  cloth  for  Prana ,  is  certainly  a  separate  act  which  is  introduced 
for  the  purpose  of  providing  a  garment  for  Prana .  Thus  this  is 
free  from  all  criticism. 

As  for  the  text,  “Whatever  is  (known  as)  food  for  all,  right 
down  to  dogs,  worms,  insects,  and  moths,  is  your  food”  (Bp. 
VI.  i.  14),  it  cannot  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  all  kinds  of 
food  are  enjoined  for  use,  since  no  such  word  of  injunction 
is  in  evidence,  and  since  this  is  an  impossibility.  But  the  injunc¬ 
tion  is  about  looking  upon  everything  as  the  food  of  Prana.  And 
owing  to  association  with  this,  it  is  but  reasonable  to  maintain 
that  even  in  the  text,  “water  is  garment”,  no  injunction  is  given 
for  sipping  water,  but  the  injunction  is  about  looking  upon  the 
well-known  water  used  for  sipping  as  the  garment  (of  Prana)  \ 
for  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  half  murder.14  Moreover,  the 
predicate  “(They)  sip”,  having  been  used  in  the  present  tense, 
cannot  imply  an  injunction. 

Opponent :  Is  not  the  verb  “(they)  think”  also  equally  used 
in  the  present  tense? 

Vedantin:  That  is  truly  so.  But  if  one  injunction  alone  can 
be  imparted,  then  from  the  mention  of  the  act  of  covering  by 
water,  it  follows  that  what  is  enjoined  here  is  the  unique  act  of 
thinking  of  water  as  the  garment,  but  not  so  the  sipping  as  it 
is  the  selfsame  sipping  already  known.  This  is  what  we  have 
propounded  earlier.  As  for  the  argument  that  the  imperative 
form  is  clearly  visible  in  the  case  of  sipping,  that  too  is  refuted 
on  account  of  sipping  being  followed  as  a  usual  course.  For  this 
very  reason  .that  the  sipping  has  not  to  be  prescribed,  the  text 
of  the  Kanva  recension  stops  with,  “They  regard  it  as  the 
removal  of  the  nakedness  of  the  vital  force”  (Bj*.  VI.  i.  14),  and 
they  do  not  have  the  (additional  Madhyandina)  text,  “Hence  a 
man  possessed  of  this  knowledge”  etc.  Therefore  in  the 
Madhyandina  recension  also,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  what  is 
referred  to  by  “a  man  having  such  a  knowledge”  is  a  meditation 

M“One  cannot  both  eat  the  cake  and  have  it.”  The  sipping  cannot 
be  an  injunction  for  physical  action  and  “all  food”  an  injunction  for 
meditation. 


III.  iii.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  677 

on  (or  imagination  about)  the  cloth  of  the  vital  force,  which  is 
the  relevant  subject-matter  and  which  is  prescribed  by  taking 
for  granted  the  sipping  as  a  usual  practice.  It  is  not  proper  to 
suppose  that  in  one  place  the  actual  sipping  and  at  another  the 
imaginary  conception  about  the  cloth  is  enjoined,  for  the  trend 
of  such  statements  as  “water  is  the  garment”  is  the  same  in  both 
the  places.  Hence  the  reasonable  position  is  that  the  imaginary 
conception  of  cloth  is  prescribed  here  and  not  sipping. 

Topic  10:  Same  Meditation  in  the  Same  Branch 

In  the  same  (branch)  ^  also  similar  (sameness  of 
meditation  and  combination  of  traits)  owing  to  non- 

difference  (of  object). 

19.  (The  meditations )  in  the  same  branch  are  similarly  the 
same  (and  their  traits  are  to  be  combined)  because  of  the  non¬ 
difference  of  the  object. 

Doubt :  In  the  Vajasaneyi  branch,  under  the  topic  of  the 
“secret  knowledge  of  fire”,  there  occurs  a  meditation  stamped 
with  the  name  of  Sancjilya  (to  whom  it  was  revealed).  In  the 
course  of  this,  we  hear  of  such  traits  as,  “He  should  meditate  on 
the  Self  as  identified  with  the  mind,  having  the  vital  force  as  the 
body,  and  effulgence  for  appearance”.  In  the  same  branch,  the 
Bfhadaraoyaka,  again,  has  this  text,  “This  being,  identified  with 
the  mind  and  resplendent  (is  realized  by  the  Yogins)  within  the 
heart  like  a  grain  of  rice  or  barley.  He  is  the  lord  of  all,  the 
ruler  of  all,  and  He  governs  whatever  there  is”  (Bj\  V.  vi.  1). 
The  doubt  arises  here:  Is  it  the  same  meditation  and  are  all  the 
traits  found  in  the  “secret  knowledge  of  fire”  and  the  Bjhadarafl- 
yaka  to  be  combined?  Or  are  the  meditations  different  and  are 
the  traits  to  be  kept  apart?  What  should  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  is  that  the  meditations  are  different 
and  the  traits  are  not  to  be  combined. 

Why? 

So  that  the  contingency  of  repetition  may  not  arise.  Having 


678  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IE.  iii.  19 

considered  the  fact  that  the  charge  of  repetition  can  be  avoided 
by  taking  shelter  under  the  plea  that  this  repetition  occurs 
owing  to  a  difference  among  the  students  and  the  meditators  in 
the  different  branches  of  the  Vedas,  it  was  determined  that 
(despite  this  fact)  the  meditation  is  the  same,  and  it  was  stated 
that  the  traits  found  in  excess  in  one  place  are  to  be  combined 
with  the  other  traits  (stated  elsewhere)  in  connection  with  the 
anecdote  of  Prana  etc.  But  in  the  case  of  the  same  branch,  this 
(kind  of)  avoidance  of  the  charge  of  repetition  becomes  impos¬ 
sible  owing  to  the  absence  of  any  difference  among  the  students 
or  meditators  (of  the  very  same  branch),  so  that  the  meditations, 
occurring  in  remote  contexts,  cannot  be  the  same.  And  it  is  not 
possible  to  make  a  division  to  the  effect  that  one  portion  of  the 
scripture  is  meant  for  prescribing  meditation  and  the  other  for 
prescribing  attributes;  for  in  that  case  dissimilar  new  traits  alone 
would  have  been  mentioned  in  different  places,  whereas  both 
similar  and  dissimilar  traits,  as  for  instance  “identified  with  the 
mind”,  are  prescribed  at  both  the  places.  Hence  the  attributes 
are  not  to  be  combined  reciprocally. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say:  Just  as  it  is  proper 
that  the  meditation  should  be  the  same  and  the  traits  also  should 
be  combined  in  the  different  branches,  so  also  it  should  be  the 
case  in  the  same  branch,  for  the  entity  meditated  on  is  non- 
different.  We  recognize  that  the  very  same  Brahman  is  to  be 
meditated  on  in  both  the  places  as  possessed  of  the  attributes  of 
being  “identified  with  the  mind”  etc.  The  entity  to  be  meditated 
on  determines  the  nature  of  the  meditation;  and  when  there  is 
no  difference  in  nature,  we  cannot  assert  that  the  meditations 
are  different  or  that  the  attributes  differ  (and  remain  restricted) 
in  consonance  with  the  difference  of  the  meditations. 

Opponent :  Have  we  not  to  assert  a  difference  of  meditation 
in  order  to  avoid  the  charge  of  repetition? 

Veddntin :  The  answer  is  in  the  negative,  for  a  division  of 
purport  is  reasonable,  inasmuch  as  it  involves  no  illogicality  to 
maintain  that  one  of  the  texts  is  meant  for  prescribing  medita¬ 
tion  and  the  other  for  attributes. 

Opponent :  If  such  be  the  case  (i.e.  if  the  Bthadaraoyaka 
prescribes  the  attributes  while  the  “secret  teaching  about  fire” 


m.iii.20]  BRAHMA -S0TRA-BHA5YA  679 

presents  the  entity  to  be  meditated  on),  then  what  is  not  stated 
in  the  “secret  teaching  about  fire”  should  alone  have  been  stated 
in  the  Bfhadaranyaka,  as  for  instance,  “He  is  the  lord  of  all” 
etc.  (Br.  V.  vi.  1),  and  what  is  stated  there,  for  instance, 
“identified  with  the  mind”  etc.  should  not  have  been  stated 
here. 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect,  since  it  is  with  the  help  of  that 
(similarity)  alone  that  we  recognize  the  identity  of  the  medita¬ 
tion  occurring  elsewhere.  For  it  is  precisely  through  the  presenta¬ 
tion  of  similar  traits  that  “the  meditation  of  Saijdilya”  occurring 
remotely  (in  the  “secret  teaching  about  fire”)  is  shown  to  be 
the  same  as  the  meditation  here  (in  the  Brhadaraoyaka) ;  and 
after  establishing  this  fact,  the  Upani$ad  adds  to  that  (earlier) 
meditation  this  injunction  about  attributes  (in  the  Bfhadarao- 
yaka).  Otherwise,  how  can  it  be  said  that  this  (text  in  the 
Brhadaragyaka)  is  by  way  of  prescribing  the  attributes  with 
regard  to  that  (in  the  other  place)?  Moreover,  when  a  sentence 
can  be  held  to  have  served  a  purpose  by  presenting  something 
that  was  not  known  earlier,  the  portion  therein  that  presents 
something  already  known  can  be  logically  held  to  be  merely 
a  restatement  of  a  known  fact;  thus  the  recognition  of  identity 
cannot  be  refuted  on  that  score  (of  repetition).  Hence  the 
logical  position  here  is  that  even  though  the  two  texts  occur  in 
the  same  branch  of  the  Vedas,  the  meditation  is  the  same,  and 
the  attributes  are  to  be  combined. 


Topic  11:  No  Combination  in  Meditation  on  Satya-Brahman 

tfRRJTg;  On  account  of  connection  trepj  (it  should  be)  so 
apqsf  elsewhere  arfo  also. 

20.  Elsewhere  also  (in  the  case  of  meditation  on  Satya- 
Brahman),  (the  attributes  have  to  be  combined)  as  here  (in  the 
case  of  handily  a-  V  idya ) ,  on  account  of  the  very  fact  of  con¬ 
nection  (with  the  same  object  of  meditation). 


680  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  III.  iii.  20 

Doubt :  In  the  Bfhadaranyaka  Upani$ad  the  beginning  is 
made  with  “Satya15  is  Brahman”  (V.  v.  1);  and  then  it  is  said, 
“That  which  is  Satya  is  that  sun — the  Being  who  is  in  that  orb 
and  the  Being  who  is  in  the  right  eye”  (V.  v.  2),  where  the 
particular  abodes  of  that  very  Satya-Brahman  is  taught  in  the 
divine  and  corporeal  contexts.  Then  after  the  vyahrtis  (mystic 
syllables — bhuh ,  bhuvah,  and  svah)  are  conceived  of  as  His  body 
(V.  v.  3),  two  secret  (mystic)  names  are  taught,  “His  secret 
name  is  Ahar.”  This  is  in  the  divine  context  (V.  v.  3),  “His 
secret  name  is  Aham  (I).”16  This  is  in  the  corporeal  context 
(V.  v.  4).  Now  the  doubt  arises:  Are  these  secret  names  to  be 
understood  jointly  in  both  the  places,  or  are  they  to  be  under¬ 
stood  separately,  one  in  the  divine  context  and  the  other  in  the 
corporeal? 

Opponent :  With  regard  to  this,  it  is  thus  surmised  by  the 
aphorism  itself:  Just  as  in  the  case  of  the  “meditation  of 
Saqujilya”,  a  combination  of  attributes  has  been  spoken  of 
although  the  meditation  itself  is  stated  separately  in  two  places, 
similar  must  be  the  case  elsewhere  also  where  the  subject- 
matter  is  similar;  for  they  (the  traits)  are  connected  with  the 
same  meditation.  For  this  meditation  on  Satya,  recited  under  the 
divine  and  corporeal  contexts,  is  but  one,  owing  to  the  non¬ 
difference  of  the  introduction  and  the  mention  of  the  two  in 
an  intermixed  manner.  Why  should  not  an  attribute  mentioned 
therein  belong  to  that  very  meditation?  For  any  code  of  con¬ 
duct  that  is  enjoined  in  relation  to  a  teacher,  for  instance  in  the 
matter  of  serving  him,  is  equally  applicable  whether  he  (the 
teacher)  be  in  a  village  or  in  a  forest.  Hence  both  the  secret 
teachings  (about  the  names)  are  to  be  understood  at  both  the 
places. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position  (of  the  opponent),  the 
refutation  is  stated  in: 


uSat  means  the  imperceptible  elements — earth,  water  and  fire;  tyat 
means  air  and  space.  So  Satya  means  Brahman  as  Hiranyagarbha  identify¬ 
ing  Himself  with  the  imperceptible  five  elements. 

“Ahar  is  derived  from  ban  or  hS  meaning  to  kill  or  shun  (evil);  and 
Aham  points  to  the  inmost  Self. 


[ILiii.  21]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  681 

*  m  IR*II 

Rather  ;f  not,  because  of  distinction. 

21.  Rather  they  are  not  to  be  combined  on  account  of  a 
distinction. 

Rather  both  the  secret  names  are  not  to  be  added  to  both. 

Why? 

Because  of  a  distinction,  because  they  are  firmly  associated 
with  (two)  distinct  places  of  meditation. 

Opponent :  How  is  there  an  association  with  distinct  places? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is  this:  The  Upani$ad  introduces 
the  Person  (Puru$a)  in  the  divine  plane  with  the  words,  “Of 
this  Being  who  is  in  the  solar  orb”  (Bf.  V.  v.  3),  and  then  recites, 
“His  secret  name  is  Ahar”  (ibid.).  Again,  introducing  the  Being 
in  the  corporeal  plane  with  the  words,  “Of  this  Being  who  is  in 
the  right  eye”  (Bf.  V.  vi.  4),  the  Upani$ad  recites,  “His  secret 
name  is  Aham”  (Ibid.).  Now  the  pronominal  form  “of  this” 
refers  to  a  proximate  object.  Hence  these  secret  names  are 
taught  in  connection  with  particular  abodes  alone.  So  how  can 
both  be  added  to  both  the  places? 

Oppone?it:  Is  not  the  infinite  Being  the  selfsame  entity  on 
the  divine  and  corporeal  planes;  for  two  abodes  are  spoken  of 
with  regard  to  the  selfsame  Satya-Brahman  (Hiraoyagarbha)? 

Vedantin :  This  is  quite  so.  Yet  since  particular  secret  names 
have  been  taught  for  the  same  Being  in  relation  to  the  particular 
modes  of  that  Being,  the  names  must  belong  to  Him  under 
those  particular  modes  alone.  We  have  a  parallel  instance  of 
this.  Although  the  teacher  continues  to  be  the  selfsame  person, 
the  service  rendered  to  him  while  he  is  seated  cannot  be  the 
same  while  he  keeps  standing,  and  what  is  meant  for  him  while 
he  is  standing  cannot  be  the  same  when  he  is  sitting.  As  for  the 
illustration  of  the  same  conduct  towards  the  teacher  whether  he 
be  in  a  village  or  a  forest,  that  is  beside  the  point.  Since  the 
personality  of  the  teacher  does  not  differ  in  the  village  and  the 
forest,  and  so  no  difference  in  the  attributes  associated  with 
his  personality  is  brought  by  the  village  or  the  forest,  the 
service  is  the  same  at  both  the  places.  Hence  the  two  secret 


682  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [IILiii.21 

names  have  to  be  dealt  with  separately  (by  restricting  each  to  its 
own  place). 


^  n^ii 

22.  The  scripture  also  indicates  the  same  thing . 

Moreover,  signs  indicative  of  the  separate  treatment  of  such 
attributes  are  in  evidence  thus:  “Of  this  one  the  form  is  the 
same  as  of  the  other  one,  this  one  has  the  same  knuckles  as  the 
other  one,  the  same  name  as  the  other  one”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  5). 

Opponent :  How  can  this  be  an  indicator? 

Veddntin :  That  is  being  shown:  Noticing  that  the  attributes 
differ  according  to  the  difference  of  the  solar  orb  and  the  eye, 
and  so  cannot  be  combined  with  each  other  (naturally),  the 
text  resorts  here  to  the  process  of  extending  (notionally)  the 
attributes  of  the  Being  in  the  solar  orb  to  the  Being  in  the  eye 
by  saying,  “Of  this  one  the  form  is  the  same  as  of  that  one” 
(ibid.)  etc.  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  these  two  secret  names 
are  to  be  dealt  with  separately. 

Topic  12:  Attributes  of  Brahman  in  Ranayaniya  Not  to  be 
Combined  Elsewhere 

IR^II 

^  And  Unchallenged  power  and  pervasion 

of  heaven  also  (are  not  to  be  combined)  for  this  very 
reason. 

23.  And  (the  attributes  of  Brahman  such  as)  possession  of 
unchallenged  powers  and  pervasion  of  heaven  are  also  not  to  be 
added  to  other  meditations  for  the  same  reason  (of  association 
with  special  abodes). 

In  the  supplementary  text  ( khila ,  that  contains  no  injunction 
or  prohibition)  of  the  Raijayanlya  branch  (of  the  Sama  Veda) 
occurs  this  passage:  “The  powers  (of  creating  space  etc.)  have 


III.iii.23]  BRAHMA- SOTRA-BHASYA  683 

Brahman  alone  as  their  source,  and  they  are  held  by  Brahman 
without  any  challenge.  That  pre-existing  Brahman  pervaded 
heaven  in  the  beginning  (even  before  the  birth  of  the  Gods)”, 
where  mention  is  made  of  such  exalted  qualities  of  Brahman 
as  possession  of  unchallenged  powers,  pervasion  of  heaven,  and 
so  on.  And  in  their  Upani§ad  itself  are  stated  such  meditations 
on  Brahman  as  the  “meditation  of  Saodilya”.  When  the  consid¬ 
eration  arises  as  to  whether  the  exalted  qualities  of  Brahman  are 
to  be  added  to  those  meditations  or  not  and  the  conclusion  (of 
the  opponent)  is  that  they  are  to  be  combined,  since  they  are 
connected  with  Brahman,  the  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  is  given: 
Such  exalted  qualities  as  the  possession  of  unchallenged  powers 
and  pervasion  of  heaven  etc.  are  not  to  be  combined  with  such 
meditations  as  that  of  Satujilya,  on  account  of  that  very  reason, 
viz  association  with  special  abodes.  Thus  in  the  “meditation  of 
Saodilya”,  the  heart  is  spoken  of  as  the  abode  of  Brahman: 
“This  my  Self  is  within  the  heart”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  3).  Similarly 
it  is  so  in  the  meditation  on  the  small  one  ( Dahara-Vidya )  as 
well:  “A  small  abode  of  the  size  of  a  lotus;  within  that  is  the 
small  Space  (Brahman)”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  1).  But  in  the  “meditation 
of  Upakosala”,  the  abode  is  the  eye:  “The  Being  that  is  seen  in 
the  eye”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  1).  Thus  different  abodes  are  discernible 
on  the  corporeal  plane  for  these  separate  meditations,  whereas 
the  exalted  qualities,  such  as  possession  of  unchallenged  powers 
and  pervasion  of  heaven  occur  on  the  divine  plane.  How  can 
these  be  available  on  the  corporeal  plane? 

Opponent :  But  the  exalted  qualities  of  the  divine  plane  are 
heard  of  in  connection  with  these  as  well,  as  for  instance  in, 
“Greater  than  heaven,  greater  than  these  worlds”  (Ch.  III.  xiv. 
3),  “This  one  is  indeed  the  bestower  of  effulgence,  for  this  One 
shines  in  all  the  worlds”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  4),  “The  Space  within 
the  heart  is  as  vast  as  that  other  Space.  Within  this  are  included 
both  heaven  and  earth”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  3),  and  so  on.  Moreover, 
there  are  also  other  meditations  on  Brahman,  unassociated  with 
any  special  abode,  such  as  on  Brahman  having  sixteen  digits. 

Vedantin :  This  is  truly  so.  Yet  there  is  a  special  reason  here 
for  not  combining  the  attributes  like  the  possession  of  unchal¬ 
lenged  powers.  The  reasonable  position  is  that  when  the  mention 


684  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.iii.23 

of  similar  attributes  calls  up  to  memory  (i.e.  establishes  the 
identity  of)  the  meditations  occurring  at  remote  places,  then  the 
attributes  occurring  at  remote  places  have  to  be  taken  together. 
But  the  attributes  like  the  possession  of  unchallenged  powers, 
and  the  attributes  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  texts  of 
such  meditations  as  that  of  Sandilya  are  mutually  incompatible, 
and  hence  they  cannot  call  up  (i.e.  establish  the  sameness  of) 
the  meditations  occurring  in  remote  contexts.  Besides,  it  cannot 
be  said  that  by  reason  of  a  mere  connection  with  Brahman,  a 
meditation  occurring  in  a  remote  context  can  be  called  up;  for 
that  logic  can  apply  even  in  a  case  of  actual  difference  of 
meditations.  The  settled  conclusion  is  that  even  though 
Brahman  is  the  same,  It  can  be  meditated  on  differently  in 
accordance  with  a  difference  of  the  exalted  qualities;  for  differ¬ 
ences  are  noticeable  in  the  cases  of  meditations  with  such 
qualities  as  “being  higher  than  the  high  and  greater  than  the 
great”  (in  the  case  of  the  same  Udgitha — Vide  B.  S.  III.  iii.  7). 
Hence  the  attributes  of  possessing  unchallenged  powers  etc.  are 
not  to  be  combined  with  such  meditations  as  that  of  Saodilya. 

Topic  13:  Purusa-Vidyas  in  Chandogya  and  Taittiriya 

qwfiwwifiw  irvii 

^  And  (the  traits  of  the  Purufa-Vidya  are  not  to  be  added  to 
the  Taittiriyaka  conception)  gprT^TFn^  because  of  not  having 
been  recited  as  in  other  branches  in  the 

course  of  Purufa-Vidya  (i.e.  thinking  about  the  aspirant). 

24.  And  the  characteristics  of  the  Puru$a-Vidya  are  not  to  be 
added  to  the  Taittiriyaka  because  they  have  not  been  recited 
there  as  it  is  done  in  the  course  of  the  Puru$a-Vidya  in  other 
branches . 

Doubt :  Both  in  the  brahmana  portions  of  the  Tao<Jins  and  the 
Paingins,  dealing  with  secret  teachings,  occurs  the  meditation 
on  puru$a  (lit.  man,  i.e.  the  aspirant  himself).  There  the  aspirant 
is  imagined  to  be  a  sacrifice;  the  whole  span  of  his  life  is  divided 


III.  iii.  24]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  685 

into  three  parts  and  are  conceived  of  as  the  three  periods  of  a 
sacrifice  (i.e.  savanas,  during  which  the  Soma  juice  is  extracted); 
his  hankering  for  food  and  so  on  are  imagined  to  be  initiation 
for  a  sacrifice  and  so  on;  and  some  other  characteristics,  such  as 
prayer  and  utterance  of  mantras  are  also  met  with  there  (Ch. 
III.  xvi.  1-6).  The  Taittiriyakas  also  conceive  of  some  sort  of 
pwrajj-sacrifice  in  the  section  starting  with,  “Of  that  very  man 
of  knowledge,  fancied  as  the  sacrifice,  the  soul  is  the  sacrificer, 
faith  is  the  wife”  etc.  (Tai.  A.  VI.  Iii.  1.,  Nara.  80).  With 
regard  to  this,  the  doubt,  arises:  Are  the  characteristics  of  the 
puru$a- sacrifice,  as  stated  elsewhere,  to  be  added  to  those  met 
with  in  the  Taittirlyaka,  or  are  they  not? 

V edantin :  When  the  possibility  of  combination  arises  from 
the  fact  of  both  being  purusa- sacrifices,  we  say  that  the  charac¬ 
teristics  are  not  to  be  combined. 

Why? 

Since  we  fail  to  recognize  the  one  to  be  of  the  same  form 
as  the  other.  That  is  why  the  teacher  (Vyasa)  says,  “As  in  the 
purusa- meditation”  (in  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad)  etc.  The  text 
about  the  meditation  on  puru$a>  as  it  occurs  in  some,  viz  the 
Taittiriya  branch,  is  not  the  same  as  found  in  some  other 
branches,  viz  of  the  Paingins  and  Tarujms.  For  in  the  Taittiriya, 
the  conception  of  the  purusa  as  a  sacrifice  is  seen  to  be  dissimilar 
to  that  of  the  others,  inasmuch  as  the  latter  enumerate  a  different 
series  consisting  of  the  wife,  the  sacrificer,  Veda,  the  altar,  a 
bundle  of  Kusa  grass,  the  sacrificial  stake,  the  g&ee,  the  sacrificial 
animal,  the  priests,  and  others.17  As  for  the  conception  of  the 
savanas ,  that  too  differs  from  others,  inasmuch  as  their  text  is, 
“Those  which  are  afternoon,  morning,  and  noon  are  the 
savanas ”  (Nara.  80),  (whereas  the  Taodins  conceive  of  the  life 
span  as  such).  As  for  the  similarities  of  the  conception  of  death 

17  “Of  that  very  sacrifice  of  the  man  of  knowledge,  the  soul  is  the 
sacrificer,  faith  is  the  wife,  the  body  is  the  fuel,  the  chest  the  altar,  the 
bundle  of  Kusa  is  the  tuft  of  hair  on  the  head;  the  heart  is  the  sacrificial 
stake,  desire  is  ghee ,  anger  is  the  animal,  austerity  is  fire,  the  quietening 
self-control  is  daksina  (payment  to  the  priests),  speech  is  the  priest  called 
Hota  (pourer  of  the  oblation),  Prana  is  the  priest  Udgata,  the  eye  is  the 
priest  Adhvaryu,  the  mind  is  the  Brahma  (Tai.  A.  VI.  Iii.  1). 


686  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  24 

as  the  final  bath  marking  the  end  of  the  sacrifice,  and  so  on, 
these  are  so  few  that  they  are  overridden  by  a  host  of  differ¬ 
ences,  and  as  such  cannot  bring  about  a  recognition  of  identity. 
Moreover,  in  the  Taittiriyaka,  the  purusa  is  not  spoken  of  as  a 
sacrifice,  the  text  there  being  “of  this  sacrifice  of  the  man  of 
knowledge”;  and  the  sixth  case-endings  there  (in  vidu$ah 
yajnasya)  are  not  used  in  apposition  conveying  the  sense  of 
“the  man  who  is  the  sacrifice”.  For  the  puru$a  (aspiring  man) 
cannot  be  a  sacrifice  in  the  primary  sense.  The  sixth  case- 
endings  are  used  here  in  a  non-appositional  (non-co-ordinate) 
sense,  meaning  thereby  “of  the  sacrifice  of  the  man  of 
knowledge”.  For  a  man  can  have  a  relation  with  a  sacrifice  in 
the  primary  sense;  and  when  there  is  a  possibility  of  the  primary 
sense,  that  alone  should  be  accepted  and  not  any  secondary 
sense.  And  in  the  sentence  “the  soul  is  the  sacrificer”  (see  foot¬ 
note)  the  text  speaks  of  the  man  as  the  sacrificer,  thereby  show¬ 
ing  that  the  sacrificer  is  related  with  the  sacrifice  in  a  non- 
appositional  sense.  Moreover,  in  the  face  of  the  text  “of  the 
sacrifice  of  that  very  man  of  knowledge”  (see  foot-note),  which 
restates  something  which  is  assumed  to  be  already  known, 
should  anyone  hold  that  the  man  is  identified  with  the  sacrifice 
and  that  the  soul  etc.  are  identified  with  the  sacrificer  and 
others,  he  will  open  himself  to  the  charge  of  splitting  up  the 
same  text  into  two.  Besides,  when  it  is  noticed  that  in  the  earlier 
text  the  knowledge  of  the  Self,  in  association  with  the  renuncia¬ 
tion  of  (everything),  is  taught  and  then  it  is  stated  in  a  regular 
sequence,  “of  this  very  man  of  knowledge”  etc.,  we  understand 
that  this  text  is  complementary  to  the  earlier  text  and  not  an 
independent  one.  So  also  we  notice  that  the  same  result  is  shown 
for  both  the  sections,  which  is,  “He  attains  the  greatness  of 
Brahman”  (Tai.  A.  VI.  Iii.  1).  But  in  the  case  of  other  (Chand- 
ogya)  branches,  the  meditation  on  puru?a  is  presented  inde¬ 
pendently  of  (and  not  as  complementary  to)  any  other,  and  it 
has  for  its  result  the  prolongation  of  life,  for  it  is  said  in  that 
very  connection,  “He  who  meditates  thus  lives  for  a  hundred 
and  sixteen  years”.  Hence  the  prayer,  mantras ,  etc.,  spoken  of 
in  those  other  branches  as  the  characteristics  of  the  meditation 
on  purusa,  are  not  to  be  added  to  the  Taittiriyaka. 


III.  iii.  25  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 

Topic  14:  Non-combination  of  Disparate  Traits 


687 


IRK.il 

Piercing  etc.  (are  not  to  be  combined) 
since  their  purports  are  disparate. 

25.  Piercing  etc.  are  not  to  be  applied  in  meditation ,  since 
(the  mantras  of  piercing  etc.  are)  disparate  in  purport. 

At  the  commencement  of  the  Upani$ad  of  the  Atharva  Veda 
is  found  the  mantra ,  “O  deity,  destroy  my  enemy  by  piercing 
his  body  all  over — specially  by  piercing  the  heart,  separating  the 
veins  and  arteries,  breaking  up  his  skull  all  around.  Let  my 
enemy  be  disintegrated  thus  in  three  ways”  etc.  The  mantra 
occurring  in  the  text  of  the  Tarujins  is:  “O  god  Sun,  get  the 
sacrifice  accomplished”  etc.  The  mantra  of  the  Satyayanins  is, 
“O  Indra  of  the  white  horse,  and  having  a  blue  hue  like 
sapphire”  etc.  Of  the  Kashas  and  the  Taittirlyakas  it  is,  “Let 
Mitra  (Sun)  be  benign  to  us,  let  Varuna  be  benign  to  us”  etc. 
(Tai.  I.  i.  1).  But  for  the  Vajasaneyins  the  Upani$ad  is  preceded 
by  the  Pravargya  Brdhmana  thus:  “In  days  of  yore,  the  gods 
made  up  their  minds  to  perform  a  satra”  (a  sacrifice  lasting  from 
13  to  100  days)  etc.  For  the  Kau$itakins  also  the  Agnitfoma 
Brdhmana  is  read  before  the  commencement  of  the  Upani$ad 
thus:  “Brahman  Itself  is  the  Agni&oma  sacrifice;  the  day  in 
which  it  is  performed  is  also  Brahman  Itself.  TherefQre  those 
who  resort  to  this  sacrifice  every  day,  attain  immortality”  (i.e. 
supreme  Brahman,  in  due  course)  etc.  Now  we  have  to  consider 
whether  all  these  mantras ,  counting  from,  “O  deity,  destroy  my 
enemy”  etc.,  and  all  the  rites  counting  from  Pravargya  are  to 
be  combined  with  the  meditations  or  they  are  not.  What  is 
then  the  conclusion  that  dawns  on  us? 

Opponent :  These  are  to  be  added  to  the  meditations. 

Why? 

Because  these  occur  in  the  proximity  of  the  Upani$adic  texts 
in  which  meditations  predominate. 

Objection :  But  we  do  not  perceive  these  to  have  been  pre¬ 
scribed  (by  any  injunction)  for  use  in  meditation. 


688  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  25 

Opponent :  Truly  so;  but  though  they  are  not  perceived  to 
be  so,  we  infer-  this  on  the  strength  of  proximity.  For  in  a  case 
where  proximity  gives  some  purpose  to  a  sentence,  it  is  not 
proper  to  leave  it  floating  in  the  air  capriciously. 

Objection :  But  we  do  not  notice  any  indication  in  these 
mantras  suggestive  of  the  use  of  these  things  in  meditation.  And 
how  can  we  understand  such  rites  as  the  Pravargya  to  be  meant 
for  use  in  meditation  also  when  they  are  palpably  enjoined  for 
some  other  purpose? 

Opponent :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  inasmuch  as  we  can 
infer  on  the  strength  of  the  use  of  the  term  hr  day  a  (heart)  that 
these  mantras  have  some  applicability  in  connection  with  medita¬ 
tions  as  well.  For  the  heart,  etc.  are  very  often  taught  as  the 
places  etc.  for  meditation.  In  that  way,  the  mantras  “piercing  the 
heart”  and  so  on,  can  very  justifiably  become  contributory 
factors  in  meditation.  And  as  a  matter  of  fact,  such  mantras  as, 
“I  attain  the  earth  by  this  one,  by  this  one,  by  this  one”  (Ch. 
III.  xv.  3),  and  so  on,  are  seen  to  be  used  in  meditations.  Hence, 
even  though  the  rites  like  Pravargya  are  used  in  other  contexts, 
there  is  nothing  contradictory  in  their  being  used  in  meditation, 
just  as  the  Bj-haspati-sava  (sacrifice)  is  used  in  course  of  the 
Vajapeya.18 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say  that  these  are  not 
to  be  combined  with  the  meditations. 

Why? 

“Since  (the  mantras  about)  piercing  ett.  are  disparate  in 
purport.”  The  purports,  namely  piercing  etc.  of  the  heart  and 
so  on,  that  are  conveyed  by  such  mantras  as,  “pierce  the 
heart”,  are  disparate,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  disconnected  with 
the  meditations  spoken  of  in  the  Upani$ads,  so  that  they  have 
no  capacity  to  combine  with  them. 

Opponent :  We  surely  propounded  earlier  that  the  heart  etc. 
are  connected  with  meditations,  and  through  them,  these  also 
become  connected  with  meditations. 

Vedantin:  The  answer  is,  no.  All  that  could  be  imagined 

“The  Brhaspati-sava  leads  to  the  attainment  of  Brabmavarcas.  Yet 
though  having  an  independent  result,  it  is  also  enjoined  as  a  part  of  the 
Vajapeya  sacrifice. 


III.  in.  25  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH A§YA  689 

somehow  in  this  way  would  be  the  appropriateness  of  the  men¬ 
tion  of  the  heart  alone;  but  the  mantra  here  does  not  mean  the 
heart  alone;  for  the  meaning  as  a  whole  of  this  mantra^  viz 
“piercing  the  heart,  separating  the  veins”,  and  so  on,  cannot  be 
connected  with  the  meditations;  for  it  purports  to  serve  as  a 
magic  spell  for  a  malevolent  purpose.  Hence  the  mantra, 
“Piercing  his  body  all  over”,  and  so  on  is  connected  with  some 
malevolent  rite.  Similarly  from  the  text  “O  god  Sun,  accomplish 
the  sacrifice”,  which  bears  the  imprint  of  the  accomplishment 
of  the  sacrifice,  it  would  appear  that  it  is  connected  with  a  rite. 
As  for  the  particular  form  of  that  connection,  it  is  to  be  known 
from  some  other  valid  source.  So  also  is  the  conclusion  with 
regard  to  the  other  mantras  which  are  known  from  some  indica¬ 
tion,  explicit  words,  or  some  other  valid  means  of  knowledge 
to  be  applicable  for  other  purposes.  Even  though  they  may  be 
read  of  in  the  Upani§adic  parts,  they  do  not  form  a  part  of 
those  meditations  on  the  ground  of  mere  proximity.  For  the 
relative  unimportance  of  proximity  in  comparison  with  explicit 
text  etc.  has  been  stated  in  Purva-Mlmamsa  in  “As  among 
explicit  statement,  indication  (or  word  capacity),  syntactical 
connection,  context,  order,  and  name,  when  any  two  of  them 
are  at  variance  with  regard  to  anything,  the  succeeding  one  is 
weaker  than  the  earlier,  since  the  succeeding  one  is  put  at  a 
disadvantage  by  the  predecessor  as  regards  the  meaning 
implied.”1  u  (Jai.  Su.  III.  iii.  13).  So  also  the  rites  like  Pravargya, 
which  have  their  application  elsewhere,  have  no  scope  in  the 
sphere  of  meditation;  for  these  have  nothing  in  common  with 
meditation  etc.  As  for  the  Bphaspati-sava,  its  application  as  an 
addendum  to  Vajapeya  is  gathered  clearly  from,  “After  per¬ 
forming  the  Vajapeya  sacrifice  one  shall  perform  the  Bphaspati- 
sava”.  Moreover,  this  single  rite  Pravargya,  enjoined  only  once, 
has  been  assigned  by  a  more  powerful  valid  means  of  knowledge 
to  other  rites  (viz  Jyotiftoma  etc.),  and  hence  it  cannot  be 
assigned  elsewhere  (to  meditation)  by  a  weaker  means  of 
knowledge  (e.g.  proximity,  order).  This  would  have  been  the 

19  For  getting  at  the  meaning,  the  succeeding  means  of  knowledge 
depends  on  the  earlier  and  not  vice  versa. 

44 


690  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA5YA  [III.iii.25 

case  if  the  predominance  of  any  one  of  the  two  means  of 
knowledge  were  not  obvious.  But  as  between  two  strong  and 
weak  means  of  knowledge,  it  is  not  possible  to  have  that  kind  of 
absence  of  distinction  as  regards  predominance,  for  strength  and 
weakness  themselves  constitute  that  distinction.  Hence  from  the 
mere  fact  of  the  proximity  of  the  texts,  it  is  not  proper  to  jump 
to  the  conclusion  that  either  mantras  or  rites  of  this  kind  form 
part  and  parcel  of  meditations.  Rather  one  should  remain  content 
with  the  fact  that  the  textual  proximity  occurs  on  account  of 
some  common  feature  of  both,  namely  that  they  are  recited 
together  by  people  who  retire  to  the  forest. 

Topic  IS:  Rejection  and  Reception  of  Merit 

ir^ii 

g  But  ||r ft  when  the  rejection  (is  mentioned,  acceptance  also 
is  implied)  it  being  connected  with  the 

correlative  term  ^?tt:  as  in  t*ie  case  of  kusas 

(wooden  sticks),  metres,  praise,  and  recitation;  flg  that 
has  been  stated. 

26.  But  where  only  the  rejection  of  virtue  and  vice  is  spoken 
ofy  the  reception  of  these  by  others  has  to  be  inferred ,  on 
account  of  the  term  reception  being  a  counter-correlative  of 
rejeciion.  And  this  is  on  the  analogy  of  kusas ,  metres ,  praise , 
and  recitation ,  as  has  been  explamed  (by  Jaimini). 

Doubt :  The  Tancjins  have  this  Upanisadic  text:  “Like  a  horse 
becoming  clean  by  shaking  away  its  (dead)  hair  (along  with 
dust),  or  the  moon  becoming  bright  by  freeing  itself  from  the 
mouth  of  Rahu  (who  causes  an  eclipse),  I  shall  cast  off  (i.e. 
become  free  from  identity  with)  the  body,  and  becoming 
identified  with  the  ever-existing  Self,  I  shall  attain  the  world  of 
Brahman”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiii.  1).  So  also  those  belonging  to  the 
Atharva-Veda  have  the  text,  “Then  the  illumined  one  com¬ 
pletely  shakes  off  both  virtue  and  vice,  becomes  taintless,  and 
attains  absolute  equality”  (Mu.  III.  i.  3.). 20  Similarly  the  Satya- 


80  Some  editions  quote  Mu.  III.  ii.  8. 


III.  iii.26] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


691 


yanins  have  this  text:  “His  sons  inherit  his  properties,  the 
friends  his  virtuous  deeds,  and  the  enemies  his  vicious  deeds”. 
Similarly  also  the  Kausltakins  have,  “He  shakes  off  both  virtues 
and  vices;  his  beloved  relatives  get  his  virtues  and  his  hated 
relatives  his  vices”  (Kau.  I.  4).  Thus  it  is  seen  that  in  some 
texts  virtues  and  vices  are  spoken  of  as  being  rejected;  in  some 
texts  as  being  shared  separately  by  the  people  loved  and  hated; 
and  in  some  texts  both  acceptance  and  rejection  are  spoken  of. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  if  both  the  facts  are  clearly  stated,  we 
have  nothing  to  say.  Where  the  acceptance  alone  is  spoken  of, 
but  not  the  rejection,  there  also  the  rejection  is  to  be  understood 
through  “presumptive  implication”;  for  when  one’s  good  and 
evil  deeds  are  received  by  others,  their  (earlier)  rejection 
becomes  a  necessity.  But  where  rejection  alone  is  spoken  of  and 
not  acceptance,  and  the  doubt  arises  whether  the  acceptance 
will  take  place  or  not,  the  conclusion  is  that  it  will  not  take 
place,  since  it  is  not  heard  of,  and  since  what  is  heard  of  in 
another  branch  belongs  to  some  other  kind  of  meditation. 
Moreover,  the  rejection  of  the  virtues  and  vices  is  by  the 
actor  himself,  whereas  their  acceptance  is  by  others;  now 
how  can  rejection  imply  any  acceptance  where  both  these 
are  not  connected  inevitably?  Hence  acceptance  is  not  implied 
in  a  case  of  (mere)  rejection. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  answer  is  given  in  the 
aphorism,  “But  where  only  the  rejection  of  virtue  and  vice  is 
spoken  of”  etc.  Even  if  rejection  alone  be  heard  of  in  a  text, 
acceptance  should  become  added  to  it,  since  it  forms  a  counter¬ 
part  of  rejection;  and  in  the  Kausltaki  Upani$ad,  the  word 
“acceptance”  is  heard  of  as  a  correlative  of  “rejection”.  Hence  ac¬ 
ceptance  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  even  at  other  places  where 
the  word  “rejection”  alone  is  heard  of.  As  for  the  argument  that 
the  one  does  not  follow  the  other,  because  it  has  not  been  men¬ 
tioned  by  the  Upanisad,  because  it  is  included  in  some  other 
meditation,  and  because  there  is  no  inevitable  connection,  that 
is  being  answered:  This  pronouncement  of  restriction21  would 


21  When  the  conceptions  differ,  the  •  traits  remain  confined  to  their 
contexts;  but  when  the  conceptions  are  the  same,  they  are  combined. 


692  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.iii.26 

be  right  in  a  case  where  something  to  be  done  has  been  spoken 
of  at  one  place  and  then  it  is  sought  to  be  extended  somewhere 
else.  But  neither  rejection  nor  acceptance  is  here  declared  as 
something  to  be  undertaken,  they  being  spoken  of  only  for  the 
sake  of  praising  knowledge  thus:  This  knowledge  of  Brahman 
is  so  glorious  that  by  its  power  are  shaken  off  good  and  evil 
from  the  enlightened  man,  even  though  they  are  the  causes  of 
transmigration;  and  then  they  get  lodgement  in  his  friends  and 
foes  (respectively).  Since  this  declaration  is  made  by  way  of 
praise,  and  since  acceptance  is  mentioned  in  some  texts  as  occur¬ 
ring  immediately  after  rejection,  the  aphorist  thinks  that  in 
other  texts  also,  wherever  there  is  a  mention  of  rejection, 
acceptance  will  also  follow  consequentially,  so  that  the  eulogy 
may  be  complete.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that  one  corroborative 
statement  ( Arthavada )  derives  its  application  by  drawing  on 
another,  as  for  instance  such  passages  as,  “The  yonder  sun  is 
the  twenty-first  counting  from  this  earth”  (Ch.  II.  x.  5),  and 
others.  How  can  it  be  asserted  here  that  the  sun  is  the  twenty- 
first  in  order  unless  one  draws  upon  the  other  corroborative 
statement  contained  in  the  text,  “The  months  are  twelve,  the 
seasons  are  five,  these  worlds  are  three,  and  that  sun  is  the 
twenty-first”?  Similarly  in  the  cases  of  the  corroborative  state¬ 
ments  like,  “The  two  triftubhs  (metres  of  that  name)  are 
conceived  of  for  the  sake  of  endowing  (the  sacrifice,  which 
is  thought  of  as  a  person)  with  organs”,  it  is  noticed  that  one 
has  to  draw  upon  such  other  corroborative  texts  as,  “Then  organ 
is  indeed  the  tristubha ”  The  statement  about  “acceptance”  being 
meant  as  a  (corroborative)  eulogy  for  knowledge,  one  must  not 
worry  oneself  too  much  over  the  problem  as  to  how  the  good 
and  evil  of  one  can  be  taken  over  by  others.  And  by  using  the 
word  “term”  in  “on  account  of  the  term  reception  being  a 
counter-correlative  of  rejection”,  the  aphorist  indicates  that  the 
succession  of  acceptance  after  rejection  is  mentioned  merely 
for  the  sake  of  eulogy;  for  if  the  combination  of  the  character¬ 
istics  had  been  meant,  it  would  have  been  stated  that  the  “thing 
ipself  (viz  virtue)  denoted  by  the  word  acceptance  follows  the 
“thing”  (viz  vice)  denoted  by  the  word  rejection.  (As  a  matter 
of  fact,  he  speaks  of  “term”  and  not  “thing”).  Hence  in  the 


III.  iii.  26]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  693 

course  of  the  discussion  abour  the  combination  of  characteristics, 
this  aphorism  occurs  (as  a  side  issue)  by  way  of  showing  the 
process  of  combining  the  corroborative  passages. 

The  portion,  “on  the  analogy  of  kusas  (i.e.  wooden  sticks  for 
keeping  count  of  the  hymns  sung),  metres,  praise,  and  recita¬ 
tion”  is  stated  by  way  of  citing  illustrations.  Thus  in  the  text 
of  the  Bhallavins,  “O  kusas ,  you  have  been  fashioned  from  the 
great  trees.  Such  as  you  are,  you  protect  me  (the  sacrificer)”,  we 
hear  of  the  origin  of  the  kusas  from  great  trees  in  a  general  way; 
but  according  to  the  text  of  the  Satyayanins,  viz  “The  Kusas 
are  made  of  the  Audumbara  tree”,  where  a  specific  mention 
occurs,  the  kusas  made  of  the  Audumbara  wood  are  resorted  to. 
Or  take  another  illustration:  In  some  texts  about  the  metres  of 
the  gods  (having  more  than  nine  syllables  to  a  quarter)  and  the 
metres  of  Asuras  (with  nine  syllables  only  to  a  quarter),  when 
the  possibility  arises  of  their  being  used  indiscriminately  either 
first  or  last,  the  decision  is  taken  according  to  the  text  of  the 
Pairigins  which  says,  “The  metres  of  the  gods  have  precedence” 
There  is  still  another  illustration:  When  in  some  text  no  partic¬ 
ular  time  for  the  chanting  of  the  hymn  meant  for  taking  up  the 
vessel  called  §o<Jasin  (in  the  course  of  the  Atiratra  sacrifice)  is 
in  evidence,  the  particular  time  is  ascertained  from  the  text, 
“Near  about  the  time  of  the  sunrise,  the  hymn  is  to  be  chanted”, 
which  occurs  in  the  scriptural  statement  in  the  Rg-Veda.  There 
is  also  this  other  illustration:  In  some  texts  the  chanting  of 
hymns  is  prescribed  for  the  priests  in  general;  but  according 
to  the  special  mention  in  the  text  of  the  Bhallavins  that  the 
Adhvaryu  is  not  to  sing,  he  is  left  out.  The  idea  conveyed  (by 
these  illustrations)  is  that  just  as  in  the  cases  of  these  kusa  etc., 
the  special  characteristic  has  to  be  borrowed  from  other  texts, 
so  also  must  “receiving”  be  combined  with  “rejection”.  For 
unless  the  special  characteristic  mentioned  in  one  Vedic  text, 
be  accepted  in  another,  it  will  lead  to  an  option  (alternativeness) 
everywhere;  but  that  is  improper  where  there  is  a  way  out. 
Hence  it  has  been  said  in  the  Purva-Mlmamsa  (Jai.  Su.  X.  viii. 
15),  “What  is  .  really  meant  is  the  ruling  out  of  the  other  in 
conformity  with  the  complementary  passage,  for  if  a  simple 


694  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [m.iii.26 

negation  be  the  meaning  it  will  lead  to  alternativeness  which  is 
a  defect”.22  (This  is  the  first  interpretation). 

Or  the  alternative  interpretation  is  this:  With  regard  to  these 
very  texts  about  “( vidhunana )  shaking”,  the  point  to  be  consid¬ 
ered  is  whether  by  this  mention  of  “shaking”  is  conveyed  the 
idea  of  rejection  (i.e.  shaking  off)  of  good  and  evil  or  some¬ 
thing  else. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  that  the 
verb  “to  shake  ( dhu )”  does  not  mean  rejection,  since  grammar 
says  that  the  root  4hun  is  used  in  the  sense  of  fluttering,  as  it  is 
seen  in  such  expressions  as,  “The  dps  of  the  flags  flutter”,  when 
the  tips  of  the  flags  are  moved  by  wind.  Hence  by  vidhunana 
is  meant  causing  disturbance,  and  that  disturbance  means  the 
prevention  of  good  and  evil  results  from  their  fruition,  they 
being  kept  in  abeyance  for  some  time. 

Vedantin :  After  propounding  the  opponent’s  view  thus,  the 
answer  has  to  be  given:  It  is  but  proper  that  this  word  vidhu¬ 
nana  should  mean  rejection,  since  it  has  as  its  complementary 
the  word  acceptance.  For  unless  the  good  and  evil  accruing  to 
somebody  be  discarded  by  him,  they  cannot  be  received  by 
another.  Although  it  is  not  possible  for  the  good  and  evil  of 
one  to  be  received  by  another  in  the  proper  sense,  still  in 
accordance  with  the  fact  that  it  has  been  declared  so  by  the 
Upani$ad,  it  can  be  ascertained  that  rejection  itself  is  denoted 
by  vidhunana .  And  even  though  this  reception  is  heard  of 


“It  is  enjoined  that  the  mantra ,  “We  also  perform  the  sacrifice”  is  to 
be  used  in  all  the  sacrifices;  and  it  is  also  enjoined  that  in  an  Anuyaja 
this  mantra  is  not  to  be  used.  Somebody  may,  however,  conclude  that 
since  an  Anuyaja  is  also  a  sacrifice,  the  mantra  should  be  used  there;  and 
this  will  give  rise  to  an  alternativeness.  The  conclusion  is  that  the  injunc¬ 
tion  is  not  a  simple  negation,  but  a  restriction — the  mantra  is  to  be  used 
in  all  sacrifices  other  than  an  Anuyaja. 

Or— In  connection  with  the  Jyotistoma  sacrifice  it  is  enjoined;  “The 
initiated  man  ( dtksita )  shall  not  offer  any  gift,  shall  not  perform  any 
sacrifice,  shall  not  cook”.  But  this  contradicts  the  injunction  that  “one 
has  to  perform  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  as  long  as  one  lives.”  Hence  the 
meaning  is  not  a  simple  negation  in  the  first  sentence,  but  rather  “A  man 
other  than  a  dikfita  shall  perform  the  sacrifice  etc.” 

By  this  interpretation,  the  optional  use  in  either  case  is  avoided. 


III.iii.27]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  695 

only  in  some  particular  context,  in  the  proximity  of  vidhunana 
(shaking  off),  it  becomes  a  determining  factor  everywhere  in 
the  matter  of  ascertaining  the  meaning  by  supplying  a  lacuna 
in  all  those  places,  even  as  it  is  by  the  Vedic  passages  in  the 
cases  of  the  ku'sas,  metres,  praise,  and  recitation.  Moreover,  it 
is  not  possible  to  shake  virtue  and  vice  like  the  tip  of  a  flag, 
since  they  are  not  material  substances.  Again  (in  the  case  of) 
the  horse,  when  it  discards  the  dust  by  shaking  its  hair,  it  also 
“shakes  off”  its  old  hair;  and  the  brdhmana  text  is,  “Shaking  off 
sin  like  a  horse  shaking  off  its  hair”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiii.  1).  Since  a 
verbal  root  can  have  many  meanings,  there  is  no  contradiction 
with  grammar.  The  portion  taduktam  has  been  already 
explained. 

Topic  16:  Discarding  Virtue  and  Vice  at  Death 

SF'TTtf  RTtTCT  ^  IRV3H 

flM-qTifr  While  departing  (from  the  body)  ^o^-3PTT^Tg;  since 
nothing  remains  to  be  attained  f|  for  ^qr  so  3 others  (say). 

27.  (A  man  of  knowledge  gets  rid  of  virtue  and  vice)  at  the 
time  of  death ,  since  nothing  remains  to  be  attained.  For  thus  it 
is  that  others  ( i.e .  the  followers  of  the  other  branches)  state. 

The  Kausltakins  mention  in  connection  with  the  Faryanka- 
Vidyd  that  the  aspirant  gets  rid  of  his  virtue  and  vice  even  while 
going  along  the  path  of  the  gods  to  Brahman,  seated  on  a 
paryanka  (couch).  The  start  is  made  with,  “He  attains  this  path 
of  the  gods  and  then  arrives  at  the  world  of  Fire”  (Kau.  I.  3), 
and  then  it  is  said,  “He  arrives  at  the  river  Viraja,  which  he 
crosses  by  the  mind  alone,  thereby  (i.e.  as  a  result  of  crossing) 
shaking  off  virtue  and  vice”  (Kau.  I.  4).  As  regards  this,  should 
the  text  be  understood  in  its  obvious  sense,  implying  the  separa¬ 
tion  from  virtue  and  vice  on  the  way  itself,  or  does  this  separa¬ 
tion  occur  even  at  the  beginning  when  one  moves  out  of  the 
body?  When  this  consideration  arises  and  when  on  the  textual 
authority  it  appears  that  the  obvious  meaning  should  be 
accepted,  the  aphorist  says,  “A  man  of  knowledge  gets  rid  of 


696  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  27 

virtue  and  vice  at  the  time  of  death”  etc.  That  is  to  say,  the 
aphorist  asserts  that  at  the  very  time  of  death,  at  the  time  of 
moving  away  from  the  body,  occurs  this  discarding  of  virtue 
and  vice  as  a  result  of  the  power  of  knowledge.  The  reason  is 
given  in,  “since  nothing  remains  to  be  attained”  inasmuch  as  a 
man,  who  has  left  for  the  other  world,  and  who  wants  to  attain 
Brahman  through  illumination,  can  have  nothing  to  attain  in  the 
interregnum  through  the  help  of  virtue  and  vice,  for  the  sake 
of  which  it  can  be  imagined  that  virtue  and  vice  linger  intact 
for  a  while.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  they  get  sublated  by 
the  power  of  knowledge,  since  their  result  is  opposed  to  that 
of  the  latter.  And  that  sublation  should  occur  as  soon  as  know¬ 
ledge  is  ready  to  yield  its  result.  Hence  though  this  destruction 
of  virtue  and  vice  really  occurs  earlier  (at  the  time  of  death), 
it  is  stated  later  (in  the  Kausltaki).  Thus  it  is  that  others,  viz  the 
Tancjins  and  the  Satyayanins  read  of  this  discarding  of  virtue 
and  vice  as  occurring  at  the  earlier  state  itself  in,  “Having  shaken 
off  sin  like  a  horse  shaking  off  its  hair”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiii.  1),  “His 
sons  inherit  his  properties,  the  friends  his  good  deeds,  and  the 
foes  his  bad  deeds”. 

iR'ni 

Since  there  is  no  conflict  between  the  two 
texts  (as  also  between  cause  and  effect)  (on  the  admis¬ 

sion  that  virtue  and  vice  can  be  destroyed)  by  voluntary 
practices. 

28.  As  there  is  no  conflict  between  the  two  (i.e.  two  texts ,  or 
cause  and  effect)  on  the  admission  that  destruction  results  from 
voluntary  effort ,  (therefore  such  effort  must  take  place  before 
death). 

If  it  be  the  case  that  the  destruction  of  good  and  evil  has  to  be 
admitted  in  the  middle  of  the  course  for  an  aspirant  who  has 
departed  from  the  body  and  is  on  his  journey  along  the  path 
of  the  gods,  then  since,  after  the  death  of  the  body,  he  cannot 
undertake  at  will  such  human  efforts  as  yama,  niyama  (self- 
control  and  regulated  conduct),  pursuit  of  knowledge,  etc.,  on 


IU.iii.29]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  697 

which  such  attenuation  of  virtue  and  vice  depends,  the  destruc¬ 
tion  of  good  and  evil,  resulting  from  such  human  effort,  cannot 
be  reasonably  upheld  as  happening  midway.  Hence  such  means 
have  to  be  practised  voluntarily  at  an  earlier  period  during  the 
stage  of  aspiration;  and  it  is  to  be  noticed  that  the  attenuation  of 
virtue  and  vice  results  from  that  alone.  In  this  way  the  cause  and 
effect  can  be  brought  into  logical  relationship  and  the  texts  of 
the  Tao<Jins  and  Satyayanins  can  be  reconciled. 

Topic  17:  Paths  of  Those  Who  Know  Or  Do  Not  Know 
the  Qualified  Brahman 

farta:  irs.ii 

apfcrern  Purposefulness  of  the  (soul’s)  course  (after 
death)  (is)  in  two  (different)  ways,  because  3RPTT 

otherwise  ftnfar:  (will  arise)  contradiction. 

29 .  The  souTs  course  after  death  must  have  purposefulness 
in  two  ways ,  for  else  it  will  lead  to  contradiction . 

Doubt :  In  some  texts  the  path  of  the  gods  is  heard  of  in  the 
proximity  of  the  discarding  of  virtue  and  vice;  but  in  other 
texts  it  is  not.  So  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  path  of  the 
gods  will  follow  for  all  invariably  after  such  destruction  of  good 
and  evil  or  it  will  follow  differentially  (in  different  cases), 
emerging  sometimes  and  sometimes  not  (for  the  followers  of 
the  qualified  and  non-qualified  Brahman  respectively). 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  just  as  the  reception  of  virtue  and  vice 
follows  in  all  cases  of  their  rejection,  so  also  should  the  path  of 
the  gods  follow  everywhere. 

Veddntin :  Faced  with  this  conclusion,  we  say,  “The  soul’s 
course  after  death  must  have  purposefulness  in  two  ways”,  that 
is  to  say,  it  should  emerge  differentially  (in  accordance  with  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  with  or  without  attributes),  the  course 
being  sometimes  available  and  sometimes  not;  but  it  is  not  avail¬ 
able  invariably.  Otherwise  if  the  course  be  available  uniformly 
for  all,  it  will  lead  to  a  contradiction;  for  instance,  any  path 
leading  to  some  region  will  stand  opposed  to  the  Upani$adic 


698  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  29 

text,  “shakes  off  both  virtue  and  vice,  becomes  taintless  and 
attains  absolute  equality”  (Mu.  III.  i.  3).  For  how  can  the  taint¬ 
less  one,  who  has  no  motion,  reach  a  different  region?  His  goal 
is  absolute  unity  which  is  not  contingent  on  reaching  some 
other  world,  so  that  according  to  us  any  course  to  be  followed 
is  meaningless  in  this  context. 

113011 

(This  is)  gqqfl:  reasonable,  because  facts, 

indicative  of  (a  soul’s  journey),  are  met  with,  *yfaq^  as  is  the 
case  in  common  life. 

30.  This  (differentiation)  is  reasonable ,  for  facts  indicative  of 
a  souVs  journey  are  met  with  (in  the  case  of  meditation  on  the 
qualified  Brahman  alone),  just  as  (much  as  such  a  differ ence  is) 
met  with  in  common  life . 

And  this  possibility  of  having  two  aspects,  that  is  to  say, 
the  fact  that  the  course  is  purposeful  in  some  cases,  but  not  so 
in  others,  is  quite  intelligible,  since  the  “facts  indicative  of  such 
a  journey  are  met  with”.  For  facts  implying  the  need  of  a  journey 
are  discernible  in  such  meditations  on  the  qualified  Brahman  as 
the  Paryanka-Vidya ;  for  in  that  connection  are  mentioned  many 
results  such  as  ascending  the  couch,  conversation  with  Brahman 
seated  on  the  couch,  and  experience  of  special  kinds  of  fra¬ 
grance,  etc.,  which  are  achievable  only  by  going  to  a  different 
region  (i.e.  Brahmaloka).  The  journey  of  the  soul  has  a  meaning 
there;  but  in  the  case  of  full  illumination,  no  such  fact  indicative 
of  such  a  journey  is  in  evidence.  For  the  men  who  realize  the 
unity  of  the  Self,  whose  desires  all  become  fulfilled,  who  get  all 
the  seeds  of  evil  burnt  away  even  while  living,  have  nothing 
else  to  look  for  except  the  exhaustion  through  experience  of  all 
the  residual  karmas  that  have  begun  to  yield  their  results  in  the 
present  bodies.  In  their  case  a  journey  is  meaningless.  And  this 
division  is  to  be  understood  in  the  same  way  as  it  exists  in  the 
world.  “Just  as  in  common  life”  one  has  to  take  the  help  of  a  road 
leading  from  one  place  to  another  when  he  wants  to  reach  a 
village,  but  not  so  when  he  wants  to  get  cured,  even  so  is  the 


III.  iii.  3 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  699 

case  here.  We  shall  deal  with  this  more  elaborately  in  the  Fourth 
Chapter. 

Topic  18:  The  Path  of  Gods  Is  for  All  Worshippers  of 
Qualified  Brahman 

affair:  Non-restriction;  (applies)  equally  to  all  (medi¬ 
tations);  arftnfar:  there  is  no  contradiction,  as 

is  known  from  Vedic  and  Smrti  texts. 

31.  (The  journey  of  the  souls  along  the  path  of  the  gods  is) 
not  restricted  (to  any  particular  meditation).  It  applies  to  all 
meditations  (on  the  qualified  Brahman).  This  involves  no 
contradiction  as  is  known  from  Upani$adic  and  Smjti  texts  (lit. 
direct  text  and  inference). 

Doubt :  It  has  been  said  that  the  soul’s  journey  has  a  meaning 
in  a  context  of  meditations  on  the  qualified  Brahman,  but  not  so 
in  the  realization  of  the  absolute  Brahman.  As  for  meditations 
on  the  qualified  Brahman,  a  journey  is  mentioned  in  connection 
with  some,  as  for  instance,  the  Paryanka-Vidya ,  the  meditation 
on  the  five  fires  ( pancagni ),  the  meditation  of  Upakosala,  and 
the  meditation  on  the  small  space  ( dahara ),  but  not  so  in  con¬ 
nection  with  others,  as  for  instance  the  meditation  on  the 
essence  ( madlnt ),  the  meditation  of  SaucJUya,  the  meditation  on 
Brahman  with  sixteen  digits  ( sodasakala ),  and  the  meditation  on 
Vaisvanara.  With  regard  to  this  the  doubt  arises:  Should  the 
soul’s  journey  be  considered  to  be  restricted  to  those  meditations 
only  where  it  is  mentioned,  or  should  it  be  accepted  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  all  the  meditations  of  this  class?  What  is  the  conclusion 
then? 

Opponent :  Restriction.  The  context  being  the  determining 
factor,  the  journey  should  be  accepted  only  where  it  is  heard 
of.  For  if  the  journey  heard  of  in  one  context  be  extended  to 
another  meditation,  then  the  authority  of  the  Upani$adic  texts 
etc.  will  be  stultified  on  account  of  everything  becoming 
acceptable  everywhere.  Moreover,  the  selfsame  course  starting 


700  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  31 

with  light  (i.e.  the  path  of  the  gods)  is  read  of  equally  in  the 
meditation  on  the  five  fires  and  the  meditation  of  Upakosala. 
Now,  if  it  were  meant  for  all,  this  repetition  would  have  been 
meaningless.  Hence  restriction  is  to  be  accepted. 

Vedcintin  :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says,  “There 
is  no  restriction”  etc.  The  path  of  the  gods  should  pertain  to  all 
the  meditations  on  the  qualified  Brahman,  calculated  as  they  are 
to  lead  to  good  fortune  (i.e.  Brahmaloka). 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  pointed  out  that  unless  a  restriction  is 
admitted,  it  will  lead  to  a  contradiction  of  the  context? 

Vedmtin  :  “There  is  no  such  contradiction,  on  account  of 
direct  text  and  inference,”  that  is  to  say,  the  Upani$ads  and 
Smjrtis.  As  for  the  Upani$adic  texts,  we  have  this  on  this  point: 
“Among  the  qualified  people,  those  who  know  (meditate)  thus 
(reach  the  path  of  light)”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1),  which  introduces  the 
path  of  the  gods  for  people  meditating  on  the  five  fires;  and 
then  it  is  shown  in  the  text,  “And  those  who,  while  living  in  the 
forest,  meditate  thus  on  faith  and  austerity”  (ibid.),  that  those 
others  who  practise  other  kinds  of  meditation,  follow  the  same 
path  as  the  meditators  on  the  five  fires. 

Opponent :  How,  again,  is  it  known  that  this  text  declares 
the  same  path  for  others  following  other  kinds  of  meditation, 
that  path  being  possible  only  for  those  who  have  faith  and 
austerity,  those  alone  having  been  mentioned  there? 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect,  for  this  path  cannot  be  attained 
through  mere  faith  and  austerity,  in  the  absence  of  the  strength 
of  knowledge  (i.e.  meditation),  since  another  Vedic  text 
declares,  “Through  knowledge  (i.e.  deep  meditation)  they 
ascend  to  that  region  from  where  all  desires  are  turned  back; 
the  people  treading  the  southern  path  do  not  reach  there,  nor 
do  the  unenlightened  men  of  austerity”.  Hence  meditations, 
other  than  that  on  the  five  fires,  are  indicated  by  the  words 
“faith  and  austerity”.  The  Vajasaneyins,  moreover,  have  this  in 
connection  with  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires,  “those  who 
know  this  as  such,  and  those  others  who  meditate  with  faith 
upon  Satya”  (Bf.  VI.  ii.  15),  which  should  be  explained  to  mean, 
“those  people  of  faith  who  meditate  on  Satya-Brahman”,  the 
word  satya  being  frequently  used  for  Brahman.  Again,  the 


III.  iii.  32]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  701 

people  meditating  on  the  five  fires  having  been  referred  to  by 
the  clause  “those  who  know  thus”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1),  others  who 
engage  in  other  kinds  of  meditation  should  be  the  people  men- 
tioned  here  in  the  second  clause  (ibid.).  Again,  since  the  text, 
“while  those  others  who  do  not  know  those  two  ways  become 
insects  and  moths,  and  these  frequently  biting  things  (gnats  and 
mosquitos)”  (Bj\  VI.  ii.  16),  shows  the  painful  lowly  state  of 
those  who  deviate  from  these  two  paths  (of  the  gods  and  manes), 
therefore  it  thereby  includes  these  (meditators)  within  the  paths 
of  the  gods  and  manes.  There  again  they  attain  the  path  of  the 
gods  as  an  effect  of  excellence  in  meditation  (and  the  path  of 
the  manes  as  a  result  of  karma).  The  Smrti  also  says,  “those  two 
paths  of  light  and  darkness  are  there  for  this  world  through 
eternity;  going  by  the  one  a  man  never  returns,  while  going 
by  the  other  he  has  to  come  back”  (Gita,  VIII.  26).  As  for  the 
description  of  the  path  of  the  gods,  starting  from  light,  twice 
in  the  meditation  of  Upakosala  and  the  meditation  on  the  five 
fires,  that  is  meant  for  enjoining  meditation  even  on  the  path 
itself.23  Hence  there  is  no  restriction  (of  the  path  of  the  gods 
to  any  particular  meditation). 

Topic  19:  People  with  a  Mission 


4lftlhTr<cfnruT|4l  For  people  with  a  mission  there  is 

(corporeal)  existence  as  long  as  the  mission 

demands  it. 

32.  Those  who  have  a  mission  to  fulfil  continue  in  the  cor¬ 
poreal  state  as  long  as  the  mission  demands  it. 

Doubt :  It  is  being  considered  whether  the  man  of  knowledge 
does  or  does  not  get  another  body  after  the  existing  one  dies. 

Objection  :  When  knowledge,  which  is  the  means  to  libera¬ 
tion,  comes  to  fruition,  it  is  out  of  place  to  consider  whether 

28  It  is  known  from  the  context  that  the  meditation  on  the  path  is  a 
part  of  the  main  meditation. 


702  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.32 

liberation  is  accomplished  or  not.  For  it  is  not  possible  to  start 
cogitating  whether  food  can  be  got  ready  when  all  the  mate¬ 
rials  for  cooking  are  already  in  hand;  nor  is  it  doubted  whether 
a  man’s  hunger  will  be  appeased  even  when  he  has  started  eating. 

Doubt :  This  consideration,  however,  is  appropriate  since 
it  is  seen  from  the  histories  and  mythologies  that  some  men  of 
illumination  get  rebirth.  Thus  it  is  mentioned  in  the  Smfti  that 
an  ancient  seer  and  Vedic  teacher  named  Apantaratamas  was 
born  under  Vi$nu’s  direction  as  Kr$na-dvaipayana,  at  the  junc¬ 
ture  of  the  two  ages  of  Kali  and  Dvapara.  And  Vasiftha,  though 
a  mind-born  son  of  Brahma,  lost  his  previous  body  owing  to  a 
curse  of  Nimi,  and  was  again  born  of  Mitra- Vanina,  at  the 
behest  of  Brahma.  It  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Sm^ti  that 
Bhj’gu  and  others,  who  were  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma 
himself,  were  reborn  from  the  sacrifice  of  Varuna.  Sanat- 
kumara,  who  was  also  a  mind-born  son  of  Brahma,  was 
reborn  as  Skanda  as  a  result  of  his  granting  a  boon  to  Rudra. 
So  also  in  the  Smjti  are  met  with  many  anecdotes  of  the  rebirth 
of  Dak$a,  Narada,  and  others  owing  to  various  reasons.  In  the 
mantra  and  corroborative  portions  of  the  Vedas  also  such  facts 
are  very  often  met  with.  Some  had  rebirth  after  the  original 
bodies  fell,  whereas  others  took  up  other  bodies  in  accordance 
with  the  process  of  entering  several  bodies  simultaneously  by 
virtue  of  their  power  of  Yoga,  even  while  retaining  their  own 
original  bodies.  And  all  of  them  are  mentioned  in  the  Smjtis  as 
having  the  realization  of  all  the  truths  presented  by  the  Vedas. 
Thus  from  noticing  the  rebirth  of  all  of  them  the  conclusion 
seems  to  be  that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  sometimes  produces 
liberation  and  sometimes  not. 

Vedantin  :  That  being  the  position,  the  answer  is  being  given: 
It  is  not  so,  since  the  corporeal  existence  of  Apantaratamas  and 
others,  engaged  in  the  mission  of  encompassing  the  well-being 
of  the  world  through  such  works  as  the  promulgation  of  the 
Vedas  and  so  on,  is  regulated  by  the  mission  itself.  Just  as  the 
divine  Sun  after  fulfilling  his  mission  in  the  universe  for  a 
thousand  ages,  will  at  the  end  attain  liberation,  free  from  rising 
and  setting,  as  it  is  declared  in  the  Upani$adic  text,  “then  after 
that  (when  his  mission  is  fulfilled),  he  (the  sun)  will  ascend 


III.  iii.  32  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  703 

higher  up  (as  Brahman)  not  to  rise  and  set  again,  but  he  will  be 
alone  existing  in  his  own  Self’  (Ch.  III.  xi.  1);  or  just  as  some 
illumined  souls  of  the  present  time,  who  have  realized  Brahman, 
(continue  to  be  free  even  while  living  and  then)  at  the  end  of 
the  exhaustion  of  the  karma ,  producing  their  present  bodies, 
experience  liberation,  in  accordance  with  the  text,  “His  delay  is 
for  that  long  only  as  his  body  does  not  fall;  and  then  he 
becomes  merged  in  Brahman”  (Ch.  VI.  xiv.  2);  similarly 
Apantaratamas  and  others,  though  they  are  divine,  are  entrusted 
with  their  respective  missions  by  God;  and  hence  though  they 
are  possessed  of  full  vision,  leading  to  liberation,  they  continue 
in  their  bodies  so  long  as  their  missions  demand  this  and  so  long 
as  their  actions  are  not  completed;  and  when  that  is  fulfilled 
they  become  freed.  Thus  there  is  no  contradiction.  For  the 
fulfilment  of  their  missions  they  move  on  from  one  body  to 
another  with  perfect  liberty,  as  though  from  one  house  to 
another,  while  ridding  themselves  of  their  residual  karmas  that 
have  started  bearing  their  fruits  once  for  all  in  those  particular 
lives;  and  while  retaining  an  unobliterated  memory  (of  their 
identity  etc.),  they  do  this  by  creating  new  bodies  and  owning 
them  either  simultaneously  or  successively,  for  they  are  the 
masters  of  the  materials  that  produce  the  bodies  and  senses.  At 
the  same  time,  they  cannot  be  classed  with  the  (unenlightened) 
people  who  (merely)  remember  their  past  lives  ( jatismaras ), 
since  it  is  well  known  from  the  Smrti  that  “they  are  those  very 
ones”.24  For  instance  it  is  stated  in  the  Smrti  that  a  woman  dis- 
courser  on  Brahman  named  Sulabha,  who  wanted  to  have  a 
discussion  with  Janaka,  gave  up  her  body,  entered  the  body  of 
Janaka,  and  having  finished  the  discussion  with  him  re-entered 
her  own  body. 

If  it  be  the  case  that  when  the  karma ,  which  has  once  started 
bearing  fruit  (by  producing  the  present  body),  has  been  used 
up,  some  other  karma ,  productive  of  a  fresh  body,  can  crop  up, 
then  any  other  karma  whose  seed  has  not  been  burnt  away,  may 

24  A  jattsmara  is  one  who  has  perforce  to  leave  the  earlier  body  and  enter 
another,  and  yet  in  the  new  body  remembers  the  experiences  of  his  past 
life.  The  enlightened  man  is,  however,  independent  in  his  movements,  and 
he  remembers  his  identity  under  all  circumstances. 


704  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  32 

spring  up  just  like  it;  and  in  that  case  only  can  it  be  apprehended 
that  the  knowledge  of  Brahman  may  or  may  not  be  an  inevi¬ 
table  cause  of  liberation.  But  such  an  apprehension  is  not  reason¬ 
able,  inasmuch  as  it  is  a  well-recognized  fact  in  the  Vedas  and 
Smrtis  that  knowledge  burns  away  the  seed  of  karma .  Thus  we 
have  the  Upanisadic  texts:  “When  that  Self,  which  is  both  high 
and  low  (or  cause  and  effect),  is  realized,  the  knot  of  the  heart 
gets  untied,  all  doubts  become  solved,  and  all  one’s  actions 
become  dissipated”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  8),  “When  true  memory  (of 
‘I  am  Brahman’)  is  regained,  all  the  knots  become  untied”  (Ch, 
VIII.  xxvi.  2),  and  so  on.  And  the  Smrti  texts  are,  “O  Arjuna, 
as  a  blazing  fire  reduces  the  fuel  to  ashes,  similarly  the  fire  of 
knowledge  burns  away  all  the  karmas ”  (Gita,  IV.  37),  “As  seeds 
scorched  by  fire  do  not  sprout  again,  so  also  the  Self  is  not 
affected  again  by  the  ‘evils’  consumed  by  knowledge”,  and  so 
on.  It  does  not  logically  follow  that  when  the  “evils”  like  igno¬ 
rance,  (egoism,  etc.)  are  burnt  away,  the  residual  karma ,  which 
is  the  seed  of  “evil”,  burns  away  in  one  part,  but  sprouts  out 
through  the  other;  for  a  sdli  (rice)  seed  burnt  by  fire  is  not  seen 
to  sprout  in  one  part.  As  for  the  residual  karma  that  has  begun 
to  yield  fruit  (in  the  present  body),  that  ceases  from  the  exhaus¬ 
tion  of  its  momentum  like  an  arrow  shot  from  the  bow,  because 
it  is  said,  “For  him  the  delay  is  only  for  that  long  as  the,  body 
does  not  fall”  (Ch.  VI.  xiv.  2),  where  the  waiting  lasts  till  the 
falling  off  of  the  body.  Hence  it  is  proper  that  the  man  with  a 
spiritual  mission  has  the  corporeal  existence  so  long  as  the  mis¬ 
sion  demands  it. 

But  thereby  the  effect  of  knowledge  does  not  cease  to  be 
inevitable,  inasmuch  as  the  Upani$adic  text  shows  that  liberation 
follows  from  knowledge  in  all  cases  without  exception,  “And 
whoever  among  the  gods  knew  it  also  became  that,  and  the 
same  with  the  sages  and  men”  (Bf.  I.  iv.  10).  It  may  well  be 
that  some  great  sages  succumb  to  the  lure  of  other  kinds  of 
meditation  resulting  in  the  acquisition  of  mystic  powers;  but 
later  they  become  detached  by  noticing  how  these  powers 
decay;  and  then  following  steadfastly  the  knowledge  of  the 
supreme  Self,  they  attain  liberation.  This  is  what  stands  to 
reason;  for  the  Smtti  says,  “When  the  final  dissolution  comes 


III.iii.33] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


705 


at  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Hiraijyagarbha,  the  men  of  know¬ 
ledge,  with  their  minds  purified,  enter  into  the  supreme  state  of 
liberation  together  with  Brahma  Himself”.  Since  knowledge 
produces  an  immediately  felt  direct  result,  there  can  be  no 
fear  of  non-acquisition  of  it.  With  regard  to  heaven  etc., 
coming  (long  after)  as  the  result  of  (past)  action,  there  may 
be  such  a  fear  as  to  whether  it  will  come  or  not;  but  the 
result  of  knowledge  is  a  matter  of  direct  experience,  because 
it  is  so  stated  in,  “The  Brahman  that  is  immediate  and  direct” 
(Bj\  III.  iv.  1)  and  because  the  text,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7),  speaks  of  it  as  an  already  realized  truth.  For  the 
sentence,  “That  thou  art”,  cannot  be  construed  to  mean  that 
you  will  become  That  (Brahman)  after  death,  because  the  text 
“The  sage  Vamadeva,  while  realizing  this  (Self)  as  That 
(Brahman),  knew,  ‘I  was  Manu,  and  the  sun’”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  10), 
shows  that  the  result  of  knowledge,  consisting  in  becoming 
identified  with  all,  occurs  simultaneously  with  the  rise  of 
complete  illumination.  Hence  liberation  comes  inevitably  to  a 
man  of  knowledge. 

Topic  20:  Conceptions  of  the  Immutable 

113311 

arSTT-ftBIPJ  Of  the  (negative)  conceptions  about  the  Immu¬ 
table,  ^  however,  ararte:  (should  be)  a  combination 
yq-cTTvqpI  because  of  the  similarity  of  defining  and  the  sameness 
of  object  like  the  Upasad  sacrifice;  ^Rjthat  has 

been  stated  (by  Jaimini). 

33.  All  the  (negative)  conceptions  of  the  Immutable  are  to  be 
combined ,  since  the  process  of  presentation  is  similar  and  the 
object  dealt  with  is  the  same .  This  is  just  as  it  is  in  the  case  of 
the  Upasad  sacrifice ,  as  has  been  shown  by  Jaimini. 

Doubt :  In  the  Bfhadaranyaka  Upani§ad  it  is  said,  “O  Gargi, 
the  knowers  of  Brahman  say,  this  Immutable  (Brahman)  is  that. 
It  is  neither  gross  nor  minute,  neither  short”  (Bj*.  III.  viii.  8) 
etc.  Similarly  it  is  heard  of  in  the  Mumjaka  Upani$ad,  “then 
45 


706  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.33 

there  is  the  higher  knowledge  by  which  is  realized  the  Immu¬ 
table”  (Mu.  I.  i.  5),  “That  which  cannot  be  perceived  and 
grasped,  which  is  without  source,  features”  (Mu.  I.  i.  6).  So 
also  elsewhere  the  supreme  Brahman  is  taught  by  way  of 
eliminating  distinctions.  There  again  in  some  texts  some  fresh 
traits  are  eliminated  that  are  not  mentioned  elsewhere.  Now 
should  all  these  ideas  involving  elimination  of  distinctions  be 
combined  together  everywhere,  or  are  they  to  be  restricted  to 
where  they  occur? 

Vedantin :  When  for  resolving  such  a  doubt  it  is  concluded 
(by  the  opponent)  that  the  Upani$adic  texts  being  different,  the 
ideas  too  are  to  be  treated  separately,  our  answer  is:  “All  the 
conceptions  of  the  Immutable”,  that  is  to  say  the  conceptions 
involving  the  negation  of  distinctions,  “are  to  be  combined” 
everywhere,  “since  the  process  of  presentation  is  the  same  and 
the  object  dealt  with  is  the  same”.  For  the  process  of  presenting 
Brahman,  consisting  in  the  negation  of  all  distinctions,  is  similar 
everywhere;  and  that  very  same  Brahman  is  sought  to  be 
explained  everywhere.  So  what  is  meant  by  saying  that  the 
conceptions  obtaining  at  one  place  should  not  be  transferred 
elsewhere?  And  this  is  how  it  has  been  explained  under  the 
aphorism,  “Bliss  and  other  characteristics  of  the  principal  entity 
(Brahman)  are  to  be  combined”  (III.  iii.  11).  But  the  positive 
attributes  were  considered  there,  whereas  the  negative  ones  are 
considered  here.  And  so  this  separate  discussion  is  undertaken 
here  for  elaborating  this  distinction.  (Or  according  to  a  different 
reading,  “This  is  the  distinction.  And  this  separate  discussion  is 
meant  for  elaborating  this”). 

“As  in  the  case  of  the  Upasad  sacrifice”  is  said  by  way  of 
illustration.  The  meaning  is  this:  It  is  enjoined  that  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  Ahinasatra  (lasting  for  more  than  a  day)  of 
Jamadagni,  one  has  to  perform  the  Upasad  sacrifice  in  which 
purodasas  (cakes)  have  to  be  offered.  Now,  the  mantras , 
“ Agnerverhotram  veradhvaram ”,  and  so  on,  which  are  enjoined 
to  be  used  while  offering  the  cakes,  are  found  in  their  original 
form  in  the  Veda  of  the  Udgata  (i.e.  the  Sama-Veda,  Taricjya 
Br.  XXI.  x.  1),  yet  they  come  to  be  associated  (that  is  chanted) 
by  the  Adhvaryu  priests  (of  the  Yajur-Veda),  since  the 


Hl.iii.  34] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


707 


purodasa  has  to  be  offered  by  the  Adhvaryu  (and  not  the 
Udgata),  and  since  the  subsidiary  sacrifices  are  regulated 
according  to  the  main  sacrifices  (in  which  the  Adhvaryu  makes 
the  offerings).  Similarly  here  also,  the  attributes  of  the  Immu¬ 
table,  that  are  dependent  on  the  Immutable,  are  everywhere  to  be 
associated  with  the  Immutable,  irrespective  of  the  place  of  their 
occurrence.  “That  has  been  said  (by  Jaimini)  in  the  first  part 
(i.e.  the  Purva-Mlmarhsa)”,  in  the  aphorism,  “In  a  case  of  dis¬ 
parity  between  the  subsidiary  text  (revealing  the  mantra  for  the 
first  time)  and  the  principal  text  (revealing  the  application),  the 
subsidiary  text  has  to  be  associated  with  the  main  injunction, 
since  the  former  is  meant  for  the  latter”  (III.  iii.  8). 

Topic  21:  Same  Conception  in  Mundaka  and  Katha 

(The  conceptions  are  the  same)  on  account 

of  the  mention  of  this  much  (i.e.  limit). 

34.  The  conceptions  (in  the  Mundaka  and  Svetasvatara  on 
the  one  hand  and  Katha  on  the  other)  are  the  same ,  on  account 
of  the  mention  of  a  particular  limit. 

Doubt :  They  of  the  Atharva  Veda,  as  also  the  SvetaSvataras, 
recite  this  verse  in  the  context  of  the  body,  “Two  birds  that  are 
ever  associated  and  have  similar  names,  cling  to  the  same  tree. 
Of  these,  the  one  eats  the  fruit  of  divergent  tastes  and  the  other 
looks  on  without  eating”  (Mu.  III.  i.  1,  Sv.  IV.  6).  The 
Kashas  also  have  this  verse:  “The  knowers  of  Brahman,  the 
worshippers  of  the  five  fires,  and  those  who  perform  the 
Nacike^a  sacrifice  thrice,  compare  to  shade  and  light,  the  two 
enjoyers  of  the  inevitable  results  of  work,  who  have  entered 
into  the  cavity  (of  the  heart)  which  is  the  supreme  abode  of 
the  most  High  (Brahman)”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  1).  The  doubt  here  is 
whether  the  conceptions  are  the  same  or  different.  What  should 
be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  The  conceptions  are  different. 

Why? 


708  BRAHMA- SOTRA-BHASYA  [III.  in.  34 

Owing  to  obvious  distinction.  In  the  mantra  “two  birds”  etc., 
one  is  noticed  to  be  enjoying  and  the  other  abstaining,  while  in 
the  mantra  “the  two  enjoyers  of  the  inevitable  results  of  work” 
etc.,  both  are  seen  to  be  enjoying.  Thus  the  objects  of  the  con¬ 
ceptions  being  distinct,  the  resulting  conceptions  must  be  dis¬ 
tinct  as  well. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says  that  the 
conceptions  are  the  same. 

How  is  it  so? 

Because  in  both  these  mantras ,  the  Upani$ads  mention  the 
nature  of  the  entity  to  be  known  as  circumscribed  by  a  limit, 
and  as  having  a  second  (associate),  and  (hence)  non-different. 

Opponent :  Has  not  the  difference  in  nature  been  pointed  out 
(by  me)? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is,  no;  for  both  these  mantras  describe 
God  as  having  the  individual  being  as  a  second,  but  they  do  not 
describe  (the  individual  as)  something  different.  To  explain:  In 
the  mantra  “two  birds”  etc.,  the  supreme  Self  that  transcends 
(all  feelings  of)  hunger  etc.  is  shown  in  the  portion  “the  other 
looks  on  without  eating”.  And  in  the  complementary  portion  of 
the  topic  also,  in  the  text  “when  he  sees  the  other  one,  the 
worshipful  God”  (Sv.  IV.  7),  the  very  same  God  is  seen  to  form 
the  subject-matter.  Even  when  the  individual  being  enjoys,  the 
supreme  Self,  though  transcending  (all  feelings  of)  hunger  etc., 
is  spoken  of  in  the  text,  “the  two  enjoyers  of  the  inevitable 
results  of  work”  etc.,  as  (though)  enjoying,  on  the  analogy  of 
the  statement  “the  people  with  umbrella  are  moving”25;  and  this 
is  so  because  the  supreme  Self  is  associated  with  the  individual 
being.  This  is  of  course  a  context  of  the  supreme  Self,  for  the 
commencement  was  made  with,  “Tell  (me)  of  that  thing  which 
you  see  as  different  from  virtue  and  different  from  vice”  (Ka.  I. 
ii.  14).  And  even  here  the  very  same  subject  is  presented  in 
the  complementary  portion  in,  “that  which  is  the  undecaying 
supreme  Brahman,  beyond  fear,  for  those  who  want  to  cross 
over  (the  world)”  (Ka.  I.  iii.  2).  This  was  also  elaborated  under 

“When  a  king  moves  with  one  umbrella  held  over  his  head,  his  fol¬ 
lowers  are  referred  to  as  “the  people  with  umbrella”,  though  they  have 
none. 


III.  iii.  35 ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  709 

the  aphorism,  “The  two  who  have  entered  into  the  cavity  are 
the  individual  Self  and  the  supreme  Self”  (I.  ii.  11).  Hence  there 
is  no  difference  as  regards  the  entity  to  be  known,  and  hence 
also  the  meditations  are  the  same.  Moreover,  all  that  is  gathered 
from  a  consideration  of  the  trend  of  all  these  three  Upani$ads 
is  the  knowledge  of  the  supreme  Self;  the  individual  being  is 
introduced  in  order  to  reveal  its  identity  (with  the  Self)  and 
for  nothing  else.  It  was  stated  earlier  that  so  long  as  a  discussion 
is  concerned  with  the  supreme  Self,  there  is  no  scope  for  any 
consideration  as  to  whether  there  is  any  difference-cum-non- 
difference.  Hence  this  (present)  attempt  is  meant  merely  for 
elaborating  that  very  truth.  Hence  also  it  follows  that  the 
additional  attributes  have  to  be  combined. 

Topic  22:  The  Inmost  Self  in  Brihadaranyaka 

3F5TCT  **nc*H:  II^Oi 

About  one’s  own  Self  (it  has  been  declared' that  it 
is)  3RHT  inmost  of  all,  as  in  the  case  of  the  aggre¬ 

gate  of  elements  (or  as  in  the  case  of  all  beings). 

35.  (The  conception  of  the  Self  is  the  same  in  Bfhadaranyaka 
III.  iv.  1  and  III.  v.  1 ,  since)  one's  own  Self  is  declared  to  be 
the  inmost  of  all  as  in  the  case  of  the  aggregate  of  elements .  ( Or 
— since  one's  own  Self  is  declared  to  be  the  inmost  of  all,  just 
as  it  is  shown  to  be  the  Self  of  all  in  Svetdhatara  VI.  11). 

Doubt :  The  Vajasaneyins  recite  the  text,  “Explain  to  me  the 
Brahman  that  is  immediate  and  direct,  the  Self  that  is  within 
all”  (Bf.  III.  iv.  1,  III.  v.  1),  twice,  just  one  after  the  other,  in 
course  of  the  question  of  U$asti  and  Kahola.  The  doubt  arises 
there  whether  the  conceptions  are  the  same  or  they  are  different. 

Opponent :  The  conceptions  must  be  different. 

Why? 

By  reason  of  the  repetition;  for  otherwise  it  would  be 
meaningless  to  speak  twice  of  the  very  same  thing,  neither  more 
nor  less.  Hence  just  as  rites  differ  in  a  case  of  repetition,  so  also 


710  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  35 

must  these  conceptions  differ  for  the  very  same  reason  of 
repetition. 

Veddntin :  That  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  utters  the 
refutation:  That  conception  is  the  same  on  account  of  absence 
of  any  distinction  in  the  presentation  of  one’s  own  Self  as  the 
inmost  entity.  It  is  one’s  own  Self,  that  is  also  the  inmost  Self, 
that  is  questioned  about  and  explained  without  any  distinction 
in  both  the  places.  For  two  Selfs  cannot  both  be  the  inmost  in 
the  selfsame  body.  In  that  case  (that  is  to  say,  if  there  be  two 
Selfs),  one  of  the  Selfs  alone  can  feasibly  be  conceived  of  as 
being  the  inmost,  while  the  other  cannot  be  the  inmost,  even  as 
it  is  the  case  with  the  assemblage  of  elements.  As  in  the  body, 
constituted  by  the  five  elements,  water  is  inner  than  earth,  fire 
is  inner  than  water,  and  so  on,  and  thus  there  can  be  such  a 
thing  as  existence  inside  in  a  relative  sense,  though  none  can  be 
the  inmost  in  the  primary  sense,  so  also  is  the  case  here.  Or 
“bhiitagramavat — just  as  it  is  shown  to  be  the  Self  of  all”  may 
refer  to  another  Upani$adic  text,  ‘The  one  Deity  remains  hidden 
in  all  beings.  He  is  all-pervasive  and  the  inmost  Self  of  all  bhutas 
(beings)”  (§v.  VI.  11),  in  which  mantra  the  selfsame  Self  is 
spoken  of  as  existing  as  the  inmost  Self  of  all  beings.  As  it  is  the 
case  there,  so  also  is  it  in  both  these  brahmanas  (of  the  Brhad- 
araoyaka).  Hence,  from  the  identity  of  the  entity  that  is  to 
be  known,  it  follows  that  the  knowledge  also  is  the  same. 


3PT*n 


1 1^11 


3RPTT  Otherwise  (i.e.  unless  the  conceptions  be  different), 
the  separate  (repetitive)  statements  cannot  be 
justified  ^  if  such  be  the  objection,  not  so, 

(it  being)  like  another  instruction  (of  this  kind). 


36.  If  it  be  argued  that  unless  difference  be  admitted  the 
separate  statements  become  illogical ,  the  reply  is  that  this  is  not 
so,  for  it  can  be  like  another  instruction  of  this  kind . 

And  the  argument  was  advanced  that  unless  the  conceptions 
be  admitted  to  be  different,  the  separate  (repetitive)  statements 
cannot  be  explained.  That  objection  has  to  be  met.  With  regard 


III.iii.37]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  711 

to  this  it  is  said  that  it  does  not  constitute  a  defect,  since  this 
can  be  reasonably  so  like  some  instruction  elsewhere.  In  the 
sixth  part  of  the  Upani§ad  of  the  Tannins,  it  is  taught  nine 
times,  “That  is  the  Self,  That  thou  art  O  Svetaketu”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7);  still  the  knowledge  does  not  differ.  So  also  must  be  the 
case  here. 

Opponent :  How  again  does  not  the  knowledge  differ  even 
though  imparted  nine  times? 

Vedantin :  Since  the  identity  of  the  knowledge  can  be  under¬ 
stood  from  the  introduction  and  the  conclusion,  since  with  a 
view  to  expounding  the  very  same  subject,  over  and  over  again, 
it  is  reopened  time  and  again  with  the  (very  same)  request, 
“Sir,  explain  this  to  me  again”  (Ch.  VI.  v.  4),  and  since  a  repeti¬ 
tion  of  the  explanation  more  than  once  can  be  justified  on  the 
ground  of  removing  fresh  doubts.  Here  also  the  beginning  and 
end  arc  seen  to  be  concerned  with  the  same  subject  since  the 
form  of  the  question  is  identical  and  the  end  is  made  in  a  similar 
way  with  the  words,  “everything  else  but  this  is  perishable”  (Bj\ 
III.  iv.  2,  III.  v.  1).  And  by  using  the  word  “eva”  (very)  in 
“the  very  Brahman  that  is  immediate  and  direct”  (Bj\  III.  v.  1), 
in  the  second  question  (of  Kahola)  as  well,  the  Upani$ad  shows 
that  the  subject-matter  of  the  first  question  is  alluded  to  in  the 
second.  Besides,  in  the  earlier  Brahmana  (III.  iv),  the  existence 
of  the  Self  beyond  cause  and  effect  (or  body  and  organs)  is 
spoken  of,  whereas  in  the  latter  that  very  Self  is  spoken  of  as 
having  the  distinction  of  being  beyond  such  worldly  charac¬ 
teristics  as  hunger  etc.  Thus  the  unity  of  purport  comes  out 
logically,  and  hence  the  knowledge  is  the  same. 

Topic  23:  Reciprocity  of  Conceptions 

(There  should  be)  reciprocity,26  fjj  for  (the 

Upani$adic  readers)  distinctly  recite  so,  as  in  the  case 

of  other  (attributes). 

“The  noun  and  adjective  being  mutually  interchangeable. 


712  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.iii.37 

57.  There  should  be  a  reciprocal  interchange  as  in  the  case 
of  other  traits;  for  so  the  readers  (of  the  scriptures)  recite 
distinctly. 

Doubt :  The  Aitareyins  have  this  text  with  regard  to  the 
Being  in  the  solar  orb,  “Now,  He  is  the  same  as  I  am,  and  1 
am  the  same  as  He  is”  (Ai.  A.  II.  ii.  4.6),  similarly  the  Jabalas 
have  this,  “O  glorious  Deity,  I  am  what  you  are,  and  you  are 
what  I  am”.  The  doubt  arises  here:  Should  the  conception  have 
two  forms  involving  a  process  of  reciprocity  or  should  it  have 
one  form  alone? 

The  opponent  says  in  this  matter  that  the  conception  should 
have  one  form  only;  for  apart  from  thinking  of  one’s  Self  as 
identical  with  God,  there  is  nothing  else  to  be  thought  of.  If, 
however,  any  such  speciality  about  the  thought  is  to  be  imagined, 
viz  that  the  transmigrating  soul  is  identical  with  God  and  God 
is  identical  with  the  transmigrating  soul,  then  the  transmigrating 
soul  will  get  some  added  excellence  through  its  identity  with 
God,  whereas  God  will  be  reduced  in  stature  by  His  identify 
with  the  transmigrating  soul.  Hence  the  conception  is  to  be 
thought  of  as  having  one  form  (i.e.  one-sided)  only.  As  for 
the  reciprocal  reading  in  the  scripture,  it  is  meant  for  emphasiz¬ 
ing  the  unity. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  refutes  it: 
This  reciprocity  is  spoken  of  in  the  scripture  for  the  purpose  of 
meditation,  just  as  in  the  case  of  other  attributes.  As  the  other 
attributes  like  “being  the  Self  of  all”  are  spoken  of  for  the  sake 
of  meditation,  so  also  is  the  case  here  as  well.  For  thus  it  is  that 
by  reciting  this  either  way,  “I  am  what  you  are,  you  are  what 
I  am”,  the  reciters  of  the  passage  point  this  out  distinctly;  and 
that  becomes  meaningful  if  the  meditation  is  to  be  resorted  to 
in  a  twofold  way;  for  otherwise  this  specific  recitation  in  two 
ways  becomes  useless,  one  alone  being  enough. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  point  out  that  if  the  double  reading 
be  imagined  to  convey  some  special  meaning,  the  Deity  will 
become  one  with  the  transmigrating  soul,  and  will  thus  become 
reduced  in  stature? 


III.iii.38]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  713 

Vedantin :  That  is  nothing  damaging,  since  it  is  precisely  this 
identity  that  is  thought  of  through  such  a  process. 

Opponent :  In  that  case  that  very  identity  of  the  two  (referred 
to  by  us)  will  become  all  the  more  strengthened. 

Vedantin :  We  do  not  avoid  this  strengthening  of  identity. 

Object :  What  do  you  do  then? 

Vedantin  :  What  we  seek  to  establish  is  that  on  the  strength 
of  the  text,  the  meditation  is  to  be  resorted  to  reciprocally  (in 
a  double  way),  and  not  in  one  way  only.  As  a  result  the  identity 
also  becomes  virtually  confirmed.  The  point  may  be  illustrated 
thus.  Although  such  attributes  as  possession  of  inevitable  desire 
etc.  are  prescribed  for  meditation,  still  God  becomes  established 
thereby  as  possessed  of  those  attributes;  similar  is  the  case  here. 
Hence  this  reciprocity  is  meant  for  meditation  (that  way);  and 
this  process  has  to  be  applied  to  similar  (other)  contexts  (where 
only  one  way  is  stated). 

Topic  24:  Satya-Brahman  in  Bri h adaran yaka 

fa  wmc  \\\*\\ 

Since  si  ^  that  very  same  vidya  (conception,  obtains  at 
both  places,  therefore)  truth  etc.  (are  to  be 

combined). 

38.  Since  the  same  Satya-V  idyll  is  taught  in  both  the  places 
(of  the  Brhaddranyaka  Upanifad )}  therefore  traits  like  Satya 
have  to  be  combined . 

Doubt :  In  the  text  beginning  with,  “He  who  knows  this  great, 
adorable,  first-born  Being  (i.e.  Hiraoyagarbha)  as  the  Satya- 
Brahman”  (Br.  V.  iv.  1),  the  Brhadaraoyaka  Upani$ad  prescribes 
a  meditation  called  the  Satya-Vidya ,  together  with  the  medita¬ 
tion  on  the  letters  of  the  name  (Satya),27  and  there  it  is  stated, 
“That  which  is  that  Satya  is  that  sun — the  Being  who  is  in  that 
orb  and  the  Being  who  is  in  the  right  eye”  etc.  (Br.  V.  v.  2). 

17  “This  name  Satya  (lit.  truth)  consists  of  three  letters  ( Sa ,  ti,  ya ).  The 
first  and  last  letters  are  truth.  In  the  middle  is  untruth.  The  untruth  is 
enclosed  on  either  side  by  truth.”  (Br.  V.  v.  1). 


714  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.38 

Now  the  doubt  arises:  Are  these  two  different  meditations  on 
Satya,  or  are  they  one? 

Opponent :  As  to  that  the  conclusion  is  that  they  are  two,  for 
the  emergence  of  result  occurs  separately,  for  the  former  it 
being  “(He)  conquers  these  worlds”  (Bj\  V.  iv.  1),  and  for 
the  latter,  “He  who  knows  as  above  destroys  and  shuns  evil” 
(Bj*.  V.  v.  3).  As  for  reference  to  (Satya)  the  subject-matter  of 
the  previous  context,  it  is  done  because  of  the  sameness  of  the 
entity  meditated  on. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say  that  this  Satya - 
Vidya  is  but  one. 

How? 

On  account  of  the  bringing  forward  of  the  subject-matter  of 
the  former  to  the  latter  on  the  basis  of  the  identity  of  the  entity 
meditated  on  by  saying,  “That  which  is  that  Satya”  (Bj\  V.  v.  2). 

Opponent :  But  it  was  pointed  out  that  even  though  the 
meditations  may  differ,  the  object  of  the  earlier  meditation  may 
be  referred  to  in  the  latter  on  the  basis  of  the  identity  of  the 
entity  meditated  on. 

Vedantin :  This  cannot  be  so;  for  this  may  be  the  case  where 
the  difference  of  the  meditations  becomes  obvious  from  some 
other  cogent  reason.  But  since  it  is  possible  to  have  it  either 
way  in  this  connection,  a  reference  to  the  matter  under  discus¬ 
sion  is  made  in  “that  which  is  that  Satya”  (Bf.  V.  v.  2),  whereby 
it  is  known  that  the  Satya,  connected  with  the  earlier  meditation, 
is  alluded  to  in  the  latter.  Thus  the  unity  of  the  meditation 
becomes  well  established. 

As  for  the  argument  that  the  reference  to  a  separate  result 
leads  to  the  conclusion  that  the  latter  is  a  separate  meditation, 
the  answer  is  this:  This  is  no  defect  since  this  mention  of  a 
separate  result  is  by  way  of  eulogizing  the  teaching  about  the 
other  parts  of  the  meditation  stated  in  “His  secret  name  is 
Ahar”  (Bj\  V.  v.  3),  “His  secret  name  is  Aham”  (Bf.  V.  v.  4). 
Moreover,  the  rule  is  that  when  the  meditation  is  the  same,  and 
the  results  have  to  be  gathered  from  the  corroborative  passages, 
the  various  results  heard  of  in  connection  with  the  subsidiaries 
have  to  be  added  to  the  main  meditation  itself.  Accordingly, 
since  that  very  same  Satya-Vidyd  is  spoken  of  as  being  asso- 


III. iii.39]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  715 

dated  with  particular  special  traits,  therefore  all  the  traits  such 
as  Satya,  are  to  be  combined  in  the  same  application  (i.e.  act  of 
meditation). 

In  connection  with  this  aphorism,  however,  some  others  cite 
this  text  about  the  Being  in  the  solar  orb  and  the  eye  as  stated 
in  the  Bfhadaraoyaka  Upani$ad,  along  with  the  texts,  “And  then 
this  golden  (effulgent)  Being  that  is  seen  in  the  solar  orb”  (Ch. 
I.  vi.  6),  and  “And  then  the  Being  that  is  seen  in  the  eye”  (Ch. 

IV.  xv.  1),  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad;  and  they  say  that  the 
very  same  meditation  on  the  JBeing  in  the  solar  orb  and  the  eye  is 
contained  in  the  latter,  and  the  meditations  are  the  same  in  both 
the  Upani$ads.  Under  this  impression  they  think  that  such  traits 
as  Satya  mentioned  in  the  Bfhadaranyaka  are  to  be  borrowed 
from  there  by  the  followers  of  the  Chandogya.  But  that  does 
not  seem  to  be  proper.  For  in  the  Chandogya,  this  meditation 
is  presented  in  connection  with  a  rite  (viz  Jyoti&oma)  and  is 
based  on  the  Udgltha  (used  in  that  rite),  inasmuch  as  indicatory 
marks  connecting  it  with  a  rite  are  met  with  in  the  beginning, 
middle,  and  end.  In  the  beginning  occurs  the  text,  “This  (earth) 
is  the  Rk  mantra  and  fire  is  the  Sama  mantra ”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  1).  In 
the  middle  is,  “Of  Him  the  Rk  and  Sama  mantras  are  the 
knuckles;  hence  it  is  Udgltha”28  (Ch.  I.  vi.  8).  And  at  the  end 
is,  “He  who  having  known  thus,  sings  the  Sama  song”  (Ch.  I. 
vii.  9).  But  in  the  Brhadaraijyaka  there  is  no  such  sign  to  con¬ 
nect  it  with  a  rite.  Since  thus  the  meditations  differ  owing  to  a 
difference  of  the  contexts,  it  is  but  proper  that  the  traits  should 
have  separate  application. 

Topic  25:  Combination  of  Traits  in  Brihadaranyaka 
and  Chandogya 

era  srrowfawr  iihii 

^nr-3TTfe  (True)  desire  etc.  (are  to  be  added)  else¬ 

where;  ^  and  cPr  (those)  in  the  other  (are  to  be  added  here) 
3HqaH-3TTfeyg:  on  account  of  abode  etc. 

“Rk  and  Sama  mantras ,  referred  to  by  the  word  Udgltha,  having  been 
presented  as  the  knuckles,  we  can  conclude  that  it  is  the  supreme  Self 
that  is  referred  to  by  the  word  Udgltha. 


716  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.39 

39.  Traits  like  (true)  desire  etc .  ( mentioned  in  the  Chan- 
dogya)  are  to  be  added  to  the  other  (viz  Brhadaranyaka),  and 
those  mentioned  there  are  to  be  added  here ,  because  of  the 
(sameness  of)  abode  etc. 

Starting  with  the  text,  “Now,  the  dahara  (small)  house  (i.e. 
heart)  of  the  shape  of  a  lotus,  that  is  within  this  city  of 
Brahman  (viz  the  body),  within  that  is  a  small  Space  (i.e. 
Brahman)”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  1),  it  is  said  “this  is  the  Self  free  from 
sins,  and  from  dirt,  death,  sorrow,  hunger,  and  thirst,  which 
has  true  desire  and  irresistible  will”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  5)  etc.  And 
the  Vajasaneyins  have  this:  “That  great  birthless  Self  which  is 
identified  with  the  intellect  and  is  in  the  midst  of  the  organs  lies 
in  the  space  that  is  within  the  heart.  It  is  the  controller  of  all, 
the  lord  of  all,  the  ruler  of  all”  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  22)  etc.  Here  the 
doubt  arises,  whether  the  knowledge  is  the  same  or  not,  and  the 
conclusion  arrived  at  (by  the  opponent)  is  that  the  knowledge 
is  the  same. 

Vedantin :  With  regard  to  this  it  is  said,  “Traits  like  desires” 
etc.  What  is  meant  by  “desire”  is  “(unfailing)  true  desire”,  just 
as  one  would  call  Devadatta  simply  Datta,  or  Satyabhama  simply 
Bhama.  The  attributes  like  unfailing  desires  that  are  met  with 
in  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad,  as  applied  to  the  space  within  the 
heart,  have  to  be  inserted  elsewhere  (in  the  Bjrhadaraijyaka)  in 
the  text,  “That  great  birthless  Self’  etc.  And  the  attributes  like 
“controller  of  all”,  met  with  in  the  Bj-hadaraoyaka,  have  to  be 
inserted  in  the  Chandogya  text,  “This  is  the  Self  free  from  sin” 
etc. 

Why? 

“Because  of  the  sameness  of  the  abode”  etc.  For  in  both  the 
places,  the  heart  is  equally  the  abode,  God  is  equally  the  entity 
to  be  realized,  and  God  is  equally  the  barrage  ( setu )  serving  to 
maintain  the  boundaries  (of  the  things)  of  this  world,  (that  is 
to  say,  to  prevent  promiscuity);  and  so  also  many  other  simi¬ 
larities  are  met  with. 

Opponent :  Are  not  differences  also  met  with?  For  the  attri¬ 
butes  in  the  Chandogya  are  associated  with  the  space  within  the 


III.  iii.  40]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  717 

heart,  whereas  (in  the  Bfhadaraoyaka)  they  are  associated  with 
Brahman  within  that  space. 

Veddntin  :  Not  so,  for  under  the  aphorism,  “The  small  space 
is  Brahman,  on  account  of  the  subsequent  reasons’’  (I.  iii.  14)  it 
was  established  that  the  term  Space  means  Brahman  even  in  the 
Chandogya.  Of  course  there  is  a  difference  here.  For  in  the 
Chandogya  Upani$ad  a  meditation  on  the  qualified  Brahman  is 
taught,  inasmuch  as  desires  etc.  are  mentioned  as  things  to  be 
known  along  with  the  Self,  in  the  text,  “Then,  again,  those  who 
depart  from  here  without  knowing  the  Self  and  these  unfailing 
desires”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  6),  whereas  in  the  Bfhadaranyaka,  the 
entity  taught  is  the  absolutely  supreme  Brahman,  as  is  evident 
from  a  co-ordinated  study  of  such  questions  and  answers  as, 
“Please  instruct  me  further  about  liberation  itself”  (IV.  iii.  15), 
“For  this  infinite  Being  is  unattached”  (ibid.).  As  for  such  attri¬ 
butes  as  being  “the  controller  of  all”,  these  are  declared  in  the 
Bphadaraijyaka  by  way  of  glorifying  the  (unqualified)  Brahman. 
And  it  is  in  line  with  this  (mere  glorification)  that  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  made  later  on  with  the  absolute  Brahman  in  the  text, 
“the  Self  is  that  which  has  been  described  as  ‘Not  this,  not  this’  ” 
(Bp.  III.  ix.  26)  etc.  But  it  has  to  be  noted  that  since  the 
qualified  Brahman  is  the  same  as  the  unqualified,  a  combination 
of  the  attributes  is  mentioned  by  this  aphorism  in  order  to  show 
the  exalted  nature  of  God,  but  this  is  not  (to  be  done  in  the 
Bphadaraijyaka)  for  meditation.20 

Topic  26:  Agnihotra  to  Prana 

UYoll 

There  can  be  no  omission  because  of  deference. 

40.  There  can  be  no  omission  (of  the  performance  of  the 

"The  Chandogya  and  Bphadaranyaka  mention  the  attributes  for  medi¬ 
tation  on  and  glorification  of  God  respectively.  It  involves  no  contradic¬ 
tion,  rather  it  suits  these  purposes  to  assume  these  attributes  at  both  the 
places.  But  while  they  have  to  be  added  to  the  former  from  the  latter,  in 
the  latter  they  are  implied  by  the  text  itself. 


718  BRAHMA-  SCTRA-BHA$YA  [III.iii.40 

Agnihotra  to  Praria)  on  account  of  the  respect  shown  (in  the 
Upanifad). 

Doubt :  In  connection  with  the  meditation  on  VaiSvanara  it 
is  heard  in  the  Chandogya  Upani§ad,  “That  morsel  of  food  that 
comes  first  is  to  be  offered  as  an  oblation.  And  when  he  offers 
that  first  oblation,  he  should  offer  it  with  the  mantra ,  ‘Svaha  to 
Prana f”  (V.  xix.  1).  Offerings  to  the  five  pranas  are  prescribed 
there.  And  with  regard  to  them  the  word  Agnihotra  is  used 
later  on  in,  “He  who  knowing  this  thus  performs  the  Agnihotra 
sacrifice”  (Ch.  V.  xxiv.  2),  as  also  in,  “As  hungry  boys  sit 
waiting  around  their  mother,  so  also  all  beings  wait  for  the 
Agnihotra  (i.e.  eating  of  such  a  man  of  knowledge)”  (Ch.  V. 
xxiv.  5).  With  regard  to  this  the  question  to  be  discussed  is 
whether  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  offered  to  Praria  ceases  to  exist 
on  the  day  (of  fasting)  when  there  is  no  eating,  or  whether 
it  does  not  cease. 

Ved&ntin :  Since  there  is  a  mention  of  the  connection  of  the 
arrival  of  the  first  morsel  of  food  (with  the  Agnihotra  under 
consideration)  in  “that  morsel  of  food”  etc.,  and  since  the  arrival 
of  a  morsel  of  food  is  meant  for  eating,  the  Agnihotra  to  Prana 
ceases  to  exist  when  there  is  no  eating. 

That  being  the  conclusion,  the  opponent  makes  the  rejoinder 
that  it  does  not  cease. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  respect  shown”.  Thus  it  is  that  in  con¬ 
nection  with  this  very  meditation  on  Valsvanara  occurs  this  text 
of  the  Jabalas:  “One  (who  resorts  to  this  Agnihotra  to  Prana) 
shall  precede  the  guests  in  eating.  As  one  might  perform  an¬ 
other’s  Agnihotra  before  performing  his  own,  this  (feeding  of 
guests  earlier)  would  also  be  like  that”.  Here  by  condemning 
the  feeding  of  the  guests  first,  the  eating  by  the  master  of  the 
house  is  enjoined  first,  thereby  showing  a  respect  for  the  Agni¬ 
hotra  performed  in  honour  of  Prana .  And  a  text  which  cannot 
tolerate  the  omission  of  the  first  place  for  the  performer  of  the 
Agnihotra  can  tolerate  much  less  the  omission  of  the  Agnihotra 
that  has  such  precedence  over  all. 

Veddntin  :  Since  there  is  the  mention  of  the  coming  of  the 


III.  iii.  41  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  719 

first  morsel  meant  for  eating,  therefore  when  there  is  no  eating, 
there  can  be  no  Agnihotra. 

Opponent :  No,  since  that  is  meant  for  prescribing  some 
particular  thing.  Since  in  the  common  Agnihotra,  milk  etc.  are 
regularly  prescribed,  so  here  also,  from  the  use  of  the  word 
Agnihotra,  the  possibility  may  arise  that  the  milk  etc.  used  there 
are  to  be  used  here  as  well  in  the  Agnihotra  to  Prana ,  on  the 
analogy  of  milk  etc.  being  used  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  Kautuja- 
payins,  called  the  Masagnihotra  (Agnihotra  for  a  month)  and 
forming  a  part  of  their  longer  satra,  just  because  the  word 
Agnihotra  is  used  there  by  way  of  courtesy.  And  hence  this 
sentence  “that  morsel  of  food”  etc.  occurs  in  order  to  prescribe 
the  subsidiary  injunction  about  the  morsel  of  food  (by  way  of 
ruling  out  milk  etc.).  Thus  in  accordance  with  the  aphorism, 
“Although  a  subsidiary  may  be  omitted,  not  so  the  main  one” 
(Jai.  Su.  X.  ii.  63),  even  if  the  subsidiary,  consisting  in  using 
the  morsel  of  food,  be  omitted,  not  so  can  the  main  act  of 
performing  Agnihotra  to  Prtfrw.80  Thus  the  conclusion  is  that 
even  though  there  may  be  omission  of  eating,  the  obligatory 
Agnihotra  to  Prana  is  to  be  performed  by  water  or  some  other 
thing  in  accordance  with  the  rule  of  using  substitutes.31 

Vedantin :  Hence  comes  the  aphorisms  reply: 

iiv*ii 

(The  Agnihotra  is  to  be  performed)  3TcT;  from  that  itself 
when  it  is  present  (i.e.  served),  for  so  is 

the  declaration. 

30  On  the  analogy  of  the  Masa-Agnihotra, .  milk  etc.  are  liable  to  be 
used  in  the  Prana-Agnihotra.  This  would  be  a  general  application.  But 
the  prescription  about  the  morsel  of  food  comes  as  an  exception  to  this. 
Hence  the  rule  about  the  morsel  of  food  being  an  exception,  when  there 
is  omission  of  food,  the  subsidiary,  viz  morsel  of  food,  also  becomes 
omitted,  and  yet  the  primary  act  of  Agnihotra  cannot  be  omitted,  since 
in  the  absence  of  an  exception  to  the  contrary,  that  Agnihotra  can  be 
performed  with  milk  etc. 

31  An  obligatory  rite  that  is  once  commenced,  must  be  finished.  So  if 
the  prescribed  things  are  not  available  the  rite  should  be  completed  even 
with  substitutes. 


720  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  41 

41.  The  Agnihotra  is  to  be  performed  from  that  (food)  itself 
when  it  is  present ,  for  such  is  the  declaration  (of  the  Upanifad). 

“When  it  is  present”,  when  the  food  comes;  “from  that  itself”, 
from  that  very  eatable  thing  that  presents  itself  first,  the  Agni¬ 
hotra  to  Prana  is  to  be  accomplished. 

Why? 

“For  such  is  the  Upani$adic  declaration.”  To  explain:  By 
using  the  word  “that”  with  regard  to  the  morsel  of  food  occur¬ 
ring  immediately  after  in  the  text  “that  morsel  of  food  that 
comes  first  is  to  be  offered  as  an  oblation”  (Ch.  V.  xix.  1),  as 
something  actually  present,  the  Upani$ad  enjoins  that  the  obla¬ 
tions  to  Prana  are  to  be  made  with  a  thing  meant  for  some  other 
purpose  (viz  eating).  But  how  can  these  oblations  call  for  a 
substitute  when,  on  the  omission  of  eating,  they  themselves 
become  stripped  of  the  circumstances  that  make  them  possible?32 

And  it  cannot  be  said  that  the  characteristics  of  the  common 
Agnihotra  have  to  be  applied  here.  In  the  case  of  the  ayana 
(i.e.  satra)  of  the  Kau^ujapayins,  the  word  Agnihotra,  appearing 
in  the  injunctive  text,  “One  shall  perform  the  Agnihotra  for  a 
month”,  may  well  be  accepted  as  presenting  an  injunction  about 
the  common  Agnihotra,  so  that  the  subsidiary  features  of  Agni¬ 
hotra  can  become  applicable  there;  but  in  the  present  case,  the 
word  Agnihotra  is  used  in  the  eulogistic  portion,  so  that  it 
cannot  enjoin  a  similar  Agnihotra.  Again,  should,  however,  the 
applicability  of  the  characteristics  of  the  common  Agnihotra  be 
admitted,  the  production  of  fire  (by  rubbing  wood)  also  would 
become  applicable;  but  that  is  not  a  possibility.  The  production 
of  fire  is  meant  to  provide  a  place  where  to  offer  the  oblations, 
but  this  oblation  is  not  meant  to  be  poured  on  fire,  since  that 
would  nullify  the  use  of  the  food  for  eating.  And  from  the 
association  with  the  things  made  ready  for  eating  it  follows  that 
the  oblation  is  to  be  made  in  the  mouth  itself.  So  also  the  text 
of  the  Jabalas,  “one  should  precede  the  guests  in  eating”,  shows 
that  this  sacrifice  has  to  be  accomplished  in  the  mouth.  It  is  for 


“There  can  be  Agnihotra  only  if  there  is  eating,  but  not  otherwise;  for 
the  offerings  are  mere  consequences  of  the  main  act  of  sitting  for  meal. 


III.  iii.  42]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  721 

this  very  reason  that  here  also  (in  the  Chandogya)  the  acces¬ 
sories  of  the  Agnihotra  are  shown  as  got  through  ideas  of 
superimposition,  in  the  text,  “His  chest  is  the  sacrificial  altar,  his 
hair  the  kusa  grass,  his  heart  the  Garhapatya  fire,  his  mind  the 
Anvaharyapacana  fire,  and  his  mouth  the  Ahavanlya  fire”  (Ch. 
V.  xviii.  2).  The  word  “altar”  here  is  to  be  understood  as  mean¬ 
ing  a  sacrificial  place  ( sthandila )  in  general;  for  the  Agnihotra, 
in  the  principal  sense,  has  no  altar,  and  its  accessories  are  got 
here  only  with  the  help  of  notional  superimposition.  Moreover, 
owing  to  the  connection  (of  the  Agnihotra  to  Prana)  with  the 
time  (noon  and  evening)  fixed  for  eating,  there  is  no  possibility 
of  its  being  performed  at  the  times  (morning  and  evening) 
fixed  for  the  ordinary  Agnihotra.  Similarly  some  other  charac¬ 
teristics  like  adoration  (or  saying  of  prayer)  etc.  also  would 
be  contradicted  in  some  way  or  other.  Hence  from  the  associa¬ 
tion  of  the  mantraSy  things,  and  the  deities  with  eating  itself,  it 
follows  that  these  five  oblations  are  to  be  accomplished  in  that 
connection.  As  for  the  show  of  respect  noticed  (in  the  Jabala 
text),  that  is  meant  for  enjoining  merely  the  precedence  in 
eating,  for  the  meaning  of  a  sentence  cannot  be  overstressed.33 
It  is  not  possible  on  the  authority  of  this  fact  of  mere  precedence 
(of  the  host)  here  that  this  Agnihotra  has  to  be  performed 
invariably.  So  when  there  is  an  omission  of  eating,  the  Agnihotra 
to  Prana  is  omitted  pari  passu. 

Topic  27:  Meditations  Connected  with  Rites  Are  Not 

Obligatory 

yrqwwforap  ^  ii^ii 

There  is  no  obligatory  rule  about  that, 
for  so  it  is  seen  (in  the  Upani$ad),  f|  for 
separate  result  (arises,  which  is)  arsrf^r^:  elimination  of 

hindrance. 

“The  Vedas  and  Smftis  enjoin  that  a  man  should  eat  after  his  guests. 
That  precedence  is  altered  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  performs  ,the  Agni¬ 
hotra  to  Prana ;  but  this  cannot  become  a  general  rule,  on  the  strength 
of  which  the  Agnihotra  can  become  a  daily  act. 

46 


722  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  42 

42.  There  is  no  obligatory  rule  about  that  ( ue .  the  meditations 
becoming  connected  always  with  rites),  for  that  is  obvious  from 
the  Upanisad ,  inasmuch  as  a  meditation  has  a  separate  result > 
consisting  in  the  elimination  of  hindrance  to  a  rite . 

Doubt :  There  are  certain  conceptions  (or  meditations)  con¬ 
nected  with  the  accessories  of  rites  as  for  instance  in  “One 
should  meditate  on  the  letter  Om  as  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  1),  and 
other  places.  We  have  to  consider  whether  these  meditations 
are  the  regular  features  of  the  rites  like  the  Juhu  (the  sacrificial 
ladle)  made  of  Palasa  wood,  or  they  are  irregular  like  the  milk¬ 
ing  pot  (f.n.  36)?  What  should  be  the  conclusion  here? 

Opponent :  They  are  regular  features. 

Why  should  this  be  so? 

On  account  of  their  occurring  in  the  sentences  enjoining 
application.  For  although  these  meditations  are  not  read  of  in 
connection  with  the  commencement  of  any  particular  rite,  yet 
by  virtue  of  their  connection  with  sacrifices  through  Udgltha 
etc.,  they  become  connected  with  the  injunctions  about  the 
performance  of  the  rites,  in  the  same  way  as  the  other  subsid¬ 
iaries  become  so  connected  with  them.  As  for  the  results 
mentioned  in  their  own  contexts,  as  for  instance,  “He  certainly 
becomes  a  fulfiller  of  desires”  (Ch.  I.  i.  7),  and  so  on,  they  are 
merely  eulogistic  having  been  used  with  verbs  in  the  present 
indicative  mood  (and  not  imperative  mood),  as  in  such  scrip¬ 
tural  statements  as,  “He  hears  no  evil”,  and  they  have  no  fruit 
as  their  principal  objective.  Hence  just  as  in  the  case  of  such 
sentences  as,  “He  whose  Juhu  (ladle)  is  made  of  Palasa  wood 
never  hears  a  sinful  verse”,  which  do  not  occur  in  their  proper 
contexts  and  yet  get  connected  with  the  sacrifices  through  the 
medium  of  the  Juhu  etc.,  and  thus  become  regularly  applicable 
like  other  accessories  read  of  in  their  proper  contexts,  so  also 
must  be  the  case  with  the  meditations  on  the  Udgltha.34 

84  In  such  cases,  Palasa,  Juhu,  etc.  help  the  sacrifice  and  thus  contribute 
to  the  origin  of  the  remote  fruit  of  the  sacrifice,  so  that  the  mention  of 
the  proximate  result  has  to  be  understood  otherwise,  that  is  to  say,  the 
result,  viz  “non-hearing  of  sinful  verse”  is  said  by  way  of  a  eulogy.  So 
also  the  fulfilling  of  desires  in  the  case  of  the  Udgltha  is  a  eulogy. 


III.  iii.42] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


723 


Vedantin :  That  being  the  position,  we  say,  “there  is  no 
obligatory  rule  about  that  (i.e.  the  upasanas — meditations — 
becoming  connected  with  rites)”.  These  phrases  that  determine 
the  meditation  on  the  true  characteristics  of  the  accessories  (like 
Udgltha)  of  the  rites,  viz  that  the  Udgltha  is  the  quintessence, 
the  acquirer,  and  source  of  prosperity,  that  it  is  the  foremost, 
it  is  Prana ,  it  is  the  sun,  and  so  on,  cannot  be  regularly  connected 
with  rites  in  the  same  way  as  their  obligatory  accessories. 

Why? 

“For  that  is  obvious  from  the  Upani$ad.”  Thus  it  is  that  the 
Upani$ad  shows  that  meditations  of  this  kind  are  not  obligatory, 
inasmuch  as,  in  the  text,  “Both  those  who  know  this  Om  thus 
(as  forming  part  of  the  Udgltha  and  possessed  of  the  attributes 
of  being  the  quintessence  etc.),  and  those  who  do  not  know 
thus,  perform  their  rites  with  this  Om ”  (Ch.  I.  i.  10),  it  is 
admitted  that  the  rites  can  be  performed  by  the  uninformed  as 
well.  And  it  is  seen  that  the  priests  Prastota  and  others,35  even 
though  ignorant  of  the  deities  of  the  Prastava  etc.,  perform  the 
duties  of  priests  as  stated  in  the  text,  “O  Prastota,  should  you 
chant  the  Prastava  without  knowing  the  deity  presiding  over 
the  Prastava”  (Ch.  I.  x.  9),  “(O  Udgata),  should  you  sing  the 
Udgltha  without  knowing  that  deity”  (Ch.  I.  x.  10),  “O  Prati- 
harta,  should  you  chant  the  concluding  portion  (Pratihara) 
without  knowing  the  deity”  (Ch.  I.  x.  11).  Moreover,  it  is 
mentioned  in  the  Upani§ad  that  for  meditations  of  this  kind, 
which  are  connected  with  rites,  results,  other  than  those  for  the 
rites  themselves,  accrue,  consisting  either  in  removing  some 
obstacle  in  the  path  of  the  fruition  of  a  rite  or  in  adding  some 
excellence  to  its  successful  fruition;  “Both  those  who  know  this 
Om  thus  and  who  do  not  know,  perform  their  rites  with  this 
Om.  But  different  are  knowledge  and  ignorance  (i.e.  they  have 
different  results).  That  alone  which  one  does  with  knowledge, 
with  faith,  and  with  meditation  on  the  deities,  becomes  more 
powerful”  (Ch.  I.  i.  10).  From  the  separation  of  the  under- 


85  The  Prastota  chants  the  first  portion,  Prastava;  the  Udgata  sings  the 
middle  portion,  Udgltha;  and  the  Pratiharta  chants  the  final  portion, 
Pratihara. 


724  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [HI.iii.42 

takings  of  the  knowers  and  the  non-knowers  by  saying,  “But 
different  are”  etc.  and  from  the  use  of  the  comparative  degree 
in  “more  powerful”  in  that  text,  it  is  understood  that  a  rite 
bereft  of  knowledge  is  also  powerful  (effective).  And  that 
becomes  possible  only  if  the  meditation  is  not  a  permanent 
feature  of  the  rite.  Were  it  invariable,  how  could  it  have  been 
admitted  that  a  rite  bereft  of  meditation  is  powerful?  For  the 
accepted  view  is  that  a  rite  becomes  powerful  when  it  is  per¬ 
formed  along  with  all  its  subsidiaries.  Similarly  in  such  medita¬ 
tions  as  that  involving  the  superimposition  of  the  worlds  on  the 
Sama  (songs),  results  are  spoken  of  as  fixed  for  the  meditations 
individually,  as  for  instance,  “For  him  are  ordained  the  worlds 
(of  enjoyment)  both  above  and  below  (the  earth)”  (Ch.  II.  ii. 
3),  and  so  on.  And  it  is  not  proper  to  argue  that  this  mention  of 
result  is  by  way  of  a  corroborative  statement  (i.e.  mere  eulogy), 
for  in  that  case  it  would  amount  to  an  attributive  corroboration 
( Gunavada ),  whereas  in  a  case  where  the  result  is  mentioned,  one 
has  to  admit  a  eulogy  of  the  main  thing.  As  for  (the  eulogistic 
interpretation  of  the  results  stated  in  connection  with)  such 
subsidiary  rites  as  the  Prayaja  etc.,  since  they  are  necessary  for 
the  .main  rites  (viz  Dar£a-PQrnam3sa),  which  depend  for  their 
proper  performance  on  the  adequate  fulfilment  of  all  the  subsid¬ 
iary  rites,  it  is  but  reasonable  that  the  mention  of  the  results 
along  with  the  Prayaja  etc.  should  be  taken  in  the  sense  of  a 
eulogy  (of  Prayaja  etc.)  And  this  is  also  the  case  with  the 
“PalaSa  Juhu”  etc.  which  occur  in  contexts  other  than  that  of 
any  rite  to  be  performed.  For  such  things  as  a  Palasa  Juhu  which 
are  not  acts  by  themselves,  cannot  be  imagined  to  produce  any 
result  unless  they  be  based  on  some  rite.  But  in  the  cases  of  the 
milking  pot  and  so  on,  the  declarations  of  results  become  justifi¬ 
able  since  these  become  necessarily  connected  with  such  acts  as 
carrying  water  that  are  needed  in  a  rite.36  So  also  in  such  cases 


“The  injunction  is  “When  the  water  is  being  carried,  it  should  be  done 
in  a  milking  pot  for  a  man  who  desires  cattle,  and  in  a  bronze  (Kamsya) 
vessel  for  one  who  wants  the  holiness  (or  the  eminence  of  a  Brahmana)” 
The  milking  pot  is  not  an  absolute  requisite  in  a  sacrifice,  a  camasa  being 
quite  in  order.  So  this  is  not  a  eulogy  but  a  fresh  injunction. 


III.  iii.  43  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  725 

as  the  sacrificial  stake  being  made  of  Bilva  wood,87  it  is  proper 
that  injunctions  about  results  should  be  admitted,  since  they  are 
based  on  such  things  as  stake  etc.  that  are  already  connected 
with  a  relevant  sacrifice.  In  the  cases,  however,  of  “being  made 
of  Palasa”  and  so  on,  there  is  no  supporting  factor  connected 
with  a  sacrifice  under  discussion.  If  in  the  latter  case,  however, 
the  terms  Juhu  etc.  (occurring  in  the  text)  are  accepted  as  the 
ground  for  the  Palasa  Juhu  becoming  connected  with  a  relevant 
sacrifice,  and  then  again  on  the  authority  of  that  very  sentence 
an  injunction  about  the  result  of  using  the  PalaSa  Juhu  be 
accepted,  that  will  lead  to  a  break  in  the  unity  of  purport  (that 
every  sentence  should  have).  But  in  the  case  of  meditations, 
since  they  are  themselves  acts,  they  can  be  the  subjects  of 
distinct  injunctions;  and  hence  the  injunctions  about  the  medi¬ 
tations  based  on  Udgltha  etc.  involve  no  contradiction.  There¬ 
fore  just  as  the  milk  pail  etc.,  even  though  dependent  on  sacri¬ 
fices,  are  not  permanently  connected  with  them,  precisely 
because  they  have  their  separate  results,  similarly  also  are  to  be 
judged  the  meditations  based  on  Udgltha  etc.  And  it  is  precisely 
for  this  reason  that  the  authors  of  the  Kalpa-Sutras  did  not 
treat  such  meditations  as  included  in  the  sacrifices. 

Topic  28:  Meditations  on  Prana  and  Vayu 

sraM«&r  ctftisn 

5T5T5T-^  Like  the  offering  tpr  to  be  sure;  ^  that  has 
been  stated. 

43.  (The  meditations  on  Pr&na  and  Vdyu  or  Air  are  to  be 
kept  apart)  exactly  as  in  the  case  of  offerings ,  as  that  has  been 
stated  by  Jaimini. 

Doubt :  In  the  text,  “The  organ  of  speech  took  a  vow,  ‘I  shall 
go  on  speaking’  ”  etc.  it  has  been  ascertained  in  the  Bjhada- 

87  The  injunction  runs  thus:  “The  sacrificial  stake  of  one  who  wants 
food  to  eat  should  be  made  of  the  Bilva  wood,  but  of  one  wanting  prowess, 
it  should  be  made  of  catechu  ( Khadira )  wood.” 


726 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.iii.45 


raijyaka  (I.  V.  21)  that  in  •  the  corporeal  context  Prana  (vital 
force)  is  the  chief  among  all  the  organs  counting  from  that  of 
speech,  and  that  in  the  divine  context  Air  (Hiranyagarbha)  is 
the  chief  among  all  counting  from  Fire.  So  also  in  the  text,  “Air 
indeed  is  the  place  of  merger”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  1),  it  has  been 
ascertained  that  on  the  divine  plane  Air  is  the  place  of  merger 
for  all  counting  from  fire,  and  in,  “Prana  indeed  is  the  place  of 
merger”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  3),  it  has  been  ascertained  that  Prana  is 
the  place  of  merger  of  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  on  the  corporeal 
plane.  Now  the  doubt  arises  here  as  to  whether  this  Air  and 
Prana  are  to  be  approached  (i.e.  meditated  on)  separately  or  in 
combination. 

Opponent :  While  in  this  predicament,  the  conclusion  is  that 
they  are  to  be  approached  jointly,  for  in  essential  nature  they 
are  identical;  and  when  the  principle  to  be  meditated  on  is  the 
same,  it  is  not  proper  to  meditate  on  it  separately.  Besides,  the 
Upani$ad  shows  that  the  principle  is  essentially  the  same  on  the 
corporeal  and  divine  planes  in  the  text  starting  with,  “Fire 
entered  into  the  mouth  assuming  the  form  of  the  organ  of 
speech”,  (“ Vayu  entered  into  the  nostrils  assuming  the  form  of 
Prana ”)  etc.  (Ai.  I.  ii.  4).  Similarly  the  text  “These  are  all  equal 
and  all  infinite”  (Bj*.  I.  v.  13)  shows  that  the  organs  in  the  body 
have  divine  glory  as  their  very  Self  (i.e.  essence).  So  also  in 
other  places  the  essential  non-difference  of  the  divine  and  the 
corporeal  is  shown  in  various  ways  in  the  respective  contexts. 
At  one  place,  again,  Air  and  Prana  are  clearly  identified  by 
saying,  “That  which  is  Prana  is  Air”.  So  also  in  the  very  context 
of  the  Bj-hadaranyaka  Upani$ad,  from  which  some  passages  have 
been  quoted  earlier,  it  is  said  in  the  course  of  the  concluding 
verse,  viz  “the  Gods  observed  the  vow  of  that  from  which  the 
sun  rises  and  in  which  it  sets”  (Bf.  I.  v.  23),  that  “the  sun 
indeed  rises  from  Prana  and  also  sets  in  it”  (ibid.),  where  unity 
is  revealed  by  making  the  conclusion  with  Prana  itself.38  This  is 
also  confirmed  by  the  text,  “Therefore  a  man  should  observe 


“The  previous  paragraph  ends  with  Vayu  (i.e.  Hiranyagarbha)  that 
knows  no  setting.  The  verse  quoted  here  refers  to  that  Vayu.  Hence 
Vayu  and  Prana  are  one. 


III.  iii.  43]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  727 

only  a  single  vow — do  the  functions  of  Praria  and  Apana  (ex¬ 
piration  and  inspiration)”  (ibid),  inasmuch  as  the  conclusion  is 
made  here  with  the  single  vow  of  Prana .  Similarly  in  the 
Chandogya  Upani§ad,  the  place  of  merger  is  taught  to  be  but 
one  by  saying,  “The  single  deity  Prajapati  (Brahma)  who  is 
the  protector  of  the  universe,  swallowed  the  four  great  ones 
(Fire,  Sun,  Water,  and  Moon  on  the  divine  plane  and  speech, 
eye,  ear,  and  mind  on  the  corporeal  plane)”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  6);  but 
this  text  does  not  say  that  the  place  of  merger  for  the  one  group 
of  four  is  one,  while  that  for  the  other  group  is  another.  Hence 
the  meditation  is  non-different. 

Vedantin :  Faced  with  this  conclusion,  we  say:  Air  and  Prana 
are  to  be  meditated  on  separately. 

Why? 

On  account  of  being  taught  separately;  for  this  instruction 
about  the  division  on  the  divine  and  corporeal  plane  is  meant 
for  meditation;  and  this  will  be  meaningless  if  the  meditations 
are  not  to  be  undertaken  separately. 

Opponent :  It  was  pointed  out  that  the  meditations  should  be 
identical  owing  to  the  essential  non-difference  of  the  entities. 

Vedantin  :  That  is  no  defect,  since  even  though  there  is  no 
such  difference  in  essence,  still  there  can  be  difference  in  instruc¬ 
tion  based  on  differences  of  modes;  and  hence  there  can  be  a 
difference  in  meditation  according  to  that  instruction.  Even 
though  the  suggestion  in  the  above  concluding  verse  may  be 
reasonably  interpreted  as  showing  the  essential  unity  of  Prana 
and  Vayu,  still  this  can  have  no  power  to  rule  out  their  distinc¬ 
tion  as  two  separate  objects  of  meditation,  as  has  been  shown 
earlier.39  Their  difference  as  objects  of  meditation  cannot  be 
nullified  also  because  Prana  and  Vayu  are  treated  as  an  illustra¬ 
tion  and  the  thing  illustrated  in,  “As  is  the  vital  force  (Prana)  in 
the  body  among  these  organs,  so  is  Vayu  (Air)  among  these 
gods”  (Bj\  I.  v.  22).  Hereby  is  explained  the  argument 

38 The  sunrise  and  sunset  being  dependent  on  Air  (cosmic  Energy), 
and  Prana  being  non-diffcrent  from  Air,  it  is  said  that  the  sunrise  and 
sunset  occur  owing  to  Prana.  But  from  this  the  verse  can  have  no  power 
to  overrule  the  two  meditations  separately  on  the  divine  and  corporeal 
planes,  as  stated  by  the  Upanisad  itself. 


728  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  43 

about  the  teaching  of  the  vow.40  The  “only”  used  in  “only 
a  single  vow”  (Bj\  I.  v.  23)  is  meant  for  resorting  to  the  vow 
of  Prana  to  the  exclusion  of  the  vows  of  the  organs  of  speech 
etc.,  for  speech  etc.  are  spoken  of  as  baffled  in  their  vows  in 
the  text,  “Death  captured  them  in  the  form  of  fatigue”  (Bj\  I. 
v.  21);  but  that  is  not  meant  for  excluding  the  vow  of  Air,  since 
starting  with  the  text,  “Now  a  consideration  of  the  vow”  (Bj*. 
I.  v.  21),  it  has  been  ascertained  that  Prana  and  Air  both  remain 
equally  unbaffled  in  their  vows.  Again,  having  said,  “a  man 
should  observe  only  a  single  vow”  (Bj\  I.  v.  23),  it  is  stated 
again,  “through  it  he  attains  identity  with  this  deity,  or  lives 
in  the  same  world  with  him”  (ibid.),  where  the  result  is  shown 
to  be  the  attainment  of  (the  deity)  Air,  thereby  proving  that 
the  vow  of  Air  has  not  been  ruled  out.  The  word  “deity”  in 
the  above  quotation  must  mean  Air,  since  the  result  sought  here 
is  the  attainment  of  identity  with  the  unlimited  one,41  and  since 
it  has  been  used  so  in  an  earlier  text,  “Air  is  the  deity  that  never 
sets”  (Bj\  I.  V.  22).  Similarly  the  Chandogya  Upani$ad  men¬ 
tions  them  separately  in,  “These  two  that  are  such  are  the  two 
places  of  merger — Air  among  the  deities,  and  Prctpa  among  the 
organs”  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  4),  and  the  conclusion  also  is  made  sepa¬ 
rately  in,  “These  then  that  are  five  in  one  group  and  five  in 
another  make  up  ten,  and  that  is  Kfta”42  (Ch.  IV.  iii.  8). 

Hence  the  approach  (in  meditation)  must  be  separate,  as  in 
the  case  of  the  offerings.  Thus  it  is  that  in  connection  with  the 
sacrifice  called  Tripurotjasinl  (having  the  offering  of  three 
purodasas  or  cakes),  as  prescribed  in  the  passage,  “purodasas  on 
eleven  potsherds  are  to  be  offered  to  king  Indra,  so  also  it  is  to 
be  offered  to  Indra,  the  super-lord  of  the  organs,  and  to  Indra, 


"Just  as  the  above  verse  speaks  of  the  oneness  of  the  entity,  but  not 
of  the  meditations,  so  also  the  mention  of  the  oneness  of  the  vow  is 
from  the  standpoint  of  the  oneness  of  the  entity,  but  not  of  the  medita¬ 
tions. 

41  Fire  etc.  arc  delimited  by  Air,  since  they  merge  in  Air.  But  Air  is 
not  so  delimited  by  them.  So  merger  in  the  unlimited  means  merger  in 
Air. 

"The  four  sides  of  the  dice  are  marked  with  4,  3,  2,  and  1,  which 
figures,  when  added  up,  make  ten,  and  are  collectively  called  Krta. 


III.  iii.  43  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  729 

sovereign  in  heaven”  (Tai.  S.  II.  iii.  6),  there  occurs  this 
sentence,  “They  shall  take  up  the  oblations  making  these  avail¬ 
able  for  all  deities,  so  that  the  uttering  of  the  word  va$af  may 
be  unfailing  in  its  result”.  From  this  sentence  and  from  the  fact 
that  the  deity  Indra  is  the  same,  the  opponent  (of  Mlmaiiisa) 
would  conclude  that  the  offerings  are  to  be  made  simultane¬ 
ously,48  whereupon  Jaimini  concludes  that  (though  Indra  is 
one),  the  attributes  of  kingship,  (super-lordship,  sovereignty), 
etc.  being  different,  the  yajya  and  anuvakya  mantras  having 
been  enjoined  to  be  reversed,44  and  the  deities  being  separate  as 
they  are  separately  enumerated,  the  offerings  also  must  be 
separate. 

Similarly  here  also,  although  in  reality  Prana  and  Vayu  are 
the  same,  still  owing  to  a  difference  in  the  aspects  to  be  medi¬ 
tated  on,  the  meditations  also  differ.  And  thus  it  is  said  in  the 
DevatA-Kftujla  of  the  Purva-Mlmaihsa,  “The  gods  are  certainly 
different,  since  they  are  cognized  differently”.  But  it  is  to  be 
noted  that  in  the  Purva-Mlmamsa,  the  difference  among  sacrifices 
is  also  admitted  even  in  accordance  with  the  difference  of  things 
and  deities;  but  that  kind  of  difference  of  meditations  does  not 
exist  here,  since  from  the  introduction  and  the  end  of  the  in¬ 
structions  on  the  divine  and  corporeal  planes  etc.  it  is  obvious 
that  the  selfsame  meditation  is  enjoined.  And  yet  even  though 
the  meditations  be  the  same,  the  meditator’s  function  differs 
(with  regard  to  them)  in  accordance  with  the  difference  in  the 
divine  and  corporeal  contexts,  just  as  it  is  the  case  with  regard 
to  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  which  differs  as  an  act  in  accordance 
with  the  difference  of  morning  and  evening.  With  this  idea  in 
mind  it  has  been  said,  “As  in  the  case  of  the  offerings  (in  the 
Puro<ja£a  sacrifice)”. 


48  If  the  offerings  be  made  one  by  one  for  the  same  deity,  the  succeeding 
offerings  become  useless;  but  this  is  not  so  when  simultaneous  offering 
is  made. 

44  The  mantra  read  after  the  Adhvaryu’s  direction  “ Yaja ”  (sacrifice)  is 
yajya ,  and  the  mantra  read  after  his  direction,  44 anubruhf ’  (utter)  is 
anuvakya .  In  this  sacrifice,  the  yajya  in  the  first  offering  becomes  the 
anuvakya  in  the  second,  the  anuvakya  of  the  first  becomes  the  yajyH 
of  the  second. 


730  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [III.iii.44 

Topic  29:  Fires  in  Agni-Rahasya  not  Parts  of  Sacrifice 


iiwii 

(Fires  in  the  Agni-rahasya  are  not  parts  of  any  rite),  f^T- 
on  account  of  abundance  of  indicatory  marks  for 
that  (mark)  is  more  powerful  (than  a  context),  ^ 

that  arPt  also  (was  said  by  Jaimini). 

44.  The  fires  (of  the  mind ,  speech ,  etc.  of  Agni-rahasya)  do 
not  form  parts  of  any  rite ,  on  account  of  the  abundance  of  indi¬ 
catory  marks;  for  these  marks  are  stronger  than  the  context. 
That  also  was  said  by  Jaimini . 

Doubt :  In  the  Agni-rahasya  (esoteric  teaching  about  the 
fires),  occurring  in  the  brahmana  of  the  Vajasaneyins,  which 
starts  with,  “All  this  was  neither  existent  nor  non-existent  before 
creation,”  it  is  stated  with  regard  to  the  mind,  “That  mind  saw 
itself  as  thirty-six  thousand;  it  saw  the  adorable  fires  as  belong¬ 
ing  to  itself,  lighted  up  by  the  mind,  and  conceived  of  as  identi¬ 
fied  with  the  mental  modes”  etc.  Similarly  such  notional  fires 
are  read  of  separately  as,  “lighted  up  by  (the  organ  of  speech), 
lighted  up  by  (the  organ  of  smell),  lighted  up  by  the  eye,  lighted 
up  by  ear,  lighted  up  by  the  hands,  lighted  up  by  (the  organ 
of)  touch”.45  With  regard  to  these  the  doubt  arises  whether 
these  fires,  lighted  up  by  the  mind  etc.,  are  to  be  used  in  con¬ 
nection  with  rites  and  they  form  parts  of  them,  or  they  are 
independent,  existing  only  for  meditation. 

Vedantin  :  Now  when  from  the  context  it  might  appear  that 
the  fires  are  to  be  used  in  rites,  the  aphorist  asserts  their  inde¬ 
pendence  by  saying,  “on  account  of  the  abundance  of  indicatory 

45  First  the  creation  of  mind  is  spoken  of.  Then  it  is  said,  “the  mind  saw 
itself’;  and  then  “it  saw  the  fires”.  Although  the  mental  modes  are  infinite, 
still  they  are  delimited  by  the  human  life  having  a  span  of  a  hundred 
years,  divided  into  36,000  days.  Hence  the  mental  modes  are  also  36,000, 
which  are  thought  of  as  the  bricks  of  the  altar,  on  which  the  fire  is 
lighted  up  by  the  mind  itself.  The  mind  saw  its  own  modes,  conceived 
of  as  bricks.  Similarly  speech  etc.  also  saw  their  modes  as  so  many  fires, 
since  the  fires  are  lighted  up  by  those  modes,  thought  of  as  bricks. 


III.  iii.  45  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  73 1 

marks”  etc.  For  in  this  Brahmana  are  to  be  met  with  an  abun¬ 
dance  of  indicatory  marks  supporting  the  view  that  these  are 
meant  merely  for  meditation,  as  for  instance,  “That  being  so, 
whatever  the  beings  think  of  through  their  minds,  by  all  that 
are  lighted  up  these  very  fires”,  and  “Whether  a  man  of  such 
knowledge  is  awake  or  asleep,  all  beings  light  up  these  fires  for 
him  for  ever”.46  Of  course,  these  indicatory  marks  are  more 
authoritative  than  the  context.  That  too  has  been  stated  in  the 
Purva-Mlmamsa:  “In  a  case  where  express  statement,  indicatory 
marks  (word  capacity),  syntactical  connection,  context,  order, 
and  name”  are  in  evidence  in  groups,  those  coming  later  in  order 
are  ruled  out  by  the  earlier,  since  the  meanings  imparted  by 
the  succeeding  ones  are  checkmated  by  the  earlier”  (Jai.  Su.  III. 
iii.  14). 


fiWT  I  mil 

On  the  strength  of  the  context  (the  conceptual  fires 
are  to  be  used  as)  alternatives  for  the  earlier  (actually 

enjoined)  fire;  fWT  they  should  constitute  (i.e.  form 
parts  of)  some  rite  like  the  imaginary  (drinking). 

45.  On  the  strength  of  the  context ,  the  conceptual  fires  are  to 
be  used  alternatively  for  the  actual  fire  enjoined  earlier .  They 
constitute  some  rite  like  the  imaginary  drinking  (of  Soma  juice). 

Opponent :  It  is  not  proper  to  say  that  these  fires  are  inde¬ 
pendent  and  not  parts  of  any  rite.  Since  these  fires  are  read  of 
in  the  context  of  the  (actual)  earlier  fire  associated  with  rites, 
this  instruction  must  be  about  a  particular  alternative  form  of 
that  very  fire;  but  it  is  not  an  independent  instruction. 

48  When  one’s  meditation  of  the  form,  “My  mental  fires  are  lighted  up 
by  all  the  mental  moods  of  all  beings”  becomes  well  established,  then  by 
all  the  thoughts  of  all  beings  are  lighted  up  the  mental  fires  of  that 
meditator. 

The  first  text  indicates  that  the  fires  form  parts  of  a  meditation  only 
and  not  of  any  rite,  since  “doing  anything  whatsoever”  cannot  form  part 
of  a  rite,  which  latter  act  can  be  known  only  from  an  injunction.  Similarly 
the  second  text  speaks  of  actions  by  all  for  ever,  whereas  an  accessory  of 
a  rite  is  regulated  as  to  its  time,  place,  and  occasion  by  an  injunction. 


732  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  45 

Objection :  Is  not  an  indicatory  sign  more  authoritative  than  a 
context? 

Opponent :  That  is  true;  but  even  an  indicatory  mark  of  this 
kind  is  not  more  authoritative  than  the  context;  for  it  is  noticed 
to  be  meant  for  some  other  purpose,  it  being  meant  for  the 
glorification  of  the  conceptual  fires.47  Although  anything  which 
is  indicatory  of  something  else  can  logically  be  interpreted  as 
presenting  some  subsidiary  matter,  when  that  something  else  is 
not  in  evidence,  yet  it  cannot  rule  out  a  context.  Hence  though 
these  fires  are  got  through  superimposition,  yet  by  force  of  the 
context  they  will  subserve  some  rite.  This  is  like  imaginary  acts. 
As  on  the  tenth  day  (actually  the  eleventh  day),  called  the 
avivakya  (speechless,  mantra- less)  day  of  the  sacrifice  which  is 
known  as  Dasa-ratra,  the  sea,  imagined  to  be  the  Soma  Juice, 
is  taken  up  in  the  earth,  imagined  to  be  a  vessel,  for  offering  to 
the  deity  Prajapati.  In  connection  with  that,  the  taking  up  of 
the  Soma  vessel,  the  placing  of  the  vessel  on  its  proper  place, 
the  offering  of  the  Soma  as  libation,  the  taking  up  of  the  re¬ 
mainder  after  the  offering,  invitation  by  the  priests  to  one 
another  to  partake  of  the  Soma,  and  the  drinking  of  the  Soma 
by  them,  that  are  mentioned  in  the  Vedas,  are  all  but  mental 
acts.  But  though  that  imagination  of  Soma  be  mental,  it  becomes 
a  part  of  the  rite,  since  it  occurs  in  the  context  of  the  rite.  So 
also  must  be  this  imagination  of  fire  in  the  present  context. 

ariwtam  nv^ii 

46.  And  (this  conclusion  is  supported)  by  the  fact  of  extended 
application . 

And  the  extended  application  of  the  attributes  of  the  actual 
fire  to  these  mental  ones,  strengthens  the  case  for  their  use  in 
rites  (the  extension  being  made  owing  to  the  similarity  with  the 
accessories  of  the  rites),  as  shown  in,  “The  adorable  fires  are 
thirty-six  thousand,  and  each  one  of  them  is  as  great  as  the 

47  An  indicatory  sign  occurring  in  an  injunction  can  rule  out  a  context, 
but  not  so  one  occurring  in  a  eulogy.  “All  beings  think  for  ever”  is  a 
eulogy  after  all.  This  sentence  has  to  be  construed  with  an  injunction,  for 
a  eulogy  cannot  present  a  new  accessory  for  any  rite. 


III.  iii.49] 


733 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 

(sacrificial)  fire  mentioned  earlier”.  For  extension  of  application 
is  based  on  similarity;  and  from  this  it  follows  that  since  this 
text  extends  the  application  of  the  fire  lighted  up  on  the  brick 
altar  to  these  mental  fires,  it  thereby  indicates  that  these  latter 
subserve  some  rite. 


IIW9II 

q  Rather  (they  constitute)  ^  a  meditation  only 

fcrakqTtl  for  so  it  is  determined. 

47.  The  fires  rather  constitute  only  a  meditation ,  for  so  it  is 
determined  (in  the  Vedas). 

Vedantin :  The  word  “rather”  sets  aside  the  opposite  point  of 
view.  These  fires,  lighted  up  by  the  mind  etc.,  ought  to  con¬ 
stitute  a  meditation  only,  and  be  independent  of  rites;  they  are 
not  accessories  of  any  rite.  That  is  how  it  has  been  ascertained 
in:  “All  these  fires,  as  such,  are  lighted  up  by  meditation  alone” 
and  “For  a  man  of  knowledge  these  fires  become  surely  lighted 
up  by  meditation”. 


HVqi 


48.  And  owing  to  the  indicatory  mark  met  with. 

There  is  also  an  indicatory  mark  to  show  that  these  are  inde¬ 
pendent  of  rites.  This  was  shown  earlier  under  the  aphorism, 
“On  account  of  an  abundance  of  indicatory  marks”  (III.  iii.  44). 

Opponent :  Even  an  indicatory  mark  cannot  be  authoritative 
about  anything  when  that  other  thing  (other  than  action  i.e. 
meditation)  itself  is  not  in  evidence.  Hence  the  indicatory 
mark  has  to  be  rejected;  and  it  should  be  concluded  on  the 
strength  of  the  context  that  the  fires  are  accessories  of  a  rite. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  aphorist  replies: 


*T  ^r:  iive.ii 


M  Owing  to  the  greater  authoritativeness  of 
express  statement  etc.  ^  also,  there  is  no  setting  aside. 


734  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  49 

49.  Moreover ,  the  view  (that  the  fires  constitute  a  meditation) 
cannot  be  set  aside  owing  to  the  greater  authority  of  express* 
statement  etc. 

It  is  not  proper  to  ascertain  on  the  strength  of  the  context 
that  they  form  parts  of  some  rite  and  thus  to  set  aside  their 
independence  of  rites,  since  express  statement  etc.  (indicatory 
mark,  syntactical  connection)  are  more  authoritative  than 
context;  for  the  conclusion  arrived  at  under  the  aphorism  about 
express  statement,  indicatory  mark,  etc.,  has  been  that  express 
statement,  indicatory  mark,  and  syntactical  connection  are  more 
authoritative  than  context  (Jai.  Su.  III.  iii.  14).  And  these  are 
found  here  to  lead  to  the  view  about  the  independence  (of  the 
fires). 

How? 

As  for  express  statement,  it  is,  “All  these  fires,  as  such,  are 
lighted  up  by  meditation  alone”.  Similarly  the  indicatory  mark 
occurs  in,  “and  whether  a  man  of  knowledge  is  awake  or  asleep, 
all  beings  light  up  those  fires  for  ever”.  Similarly  there  is  syntac¬ 
tical  connection  in,  “By  meditation  alone  are  these  fires  lighted 
up  for  a  man  of  knowledge”.  The  express  statement  “lighted  up 
by  meditation  alone”  made  with  a  restrictive  particle  (eva — 
alone)  will  become  nullified  if  these  are  admitted  to  be  con¬ 
nected  with  rites. 

Opponent :  This  restriction  should  be  interpreted  to  mean 
that  no  external  accessory  is  to  be  used  (in  lighting  the  fires). 

Vedantin:  The  answer  is  in  the  negative.  If  that  were  the 
implication,  then  that  would  have  been  served  by  simply  saying, 
“lighted  up  by  meditation”,  which  would  amount  to  declaring 
that  these  fires  in  essence  constitute  a  meditation  which  is  free 
from  external  things,  so  that  this  restriction  (by  “alone”)  would 
be  uncalled  for,  since  by  nature  they  would  be  free  from  ex¬ 
ternal  accessories.  And  yet  even  though  these  fires  are  independ¬ 
ent  of  external  accessories,  there  may  arise  the  possibility  of 
their  becoming  used  in  rites  like  the  mental  drinking  of  Soma. 
Thus  the  restriction  becomes  purposeful  by  serving  to  rule  that 
possibility  out.  Similarly  the  continuity  of  the  act  noticed  in 
the  text,  “whether  the  man  of  knowledge  is  awake  or  asleep, 


m.  iii.  50] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


735 


all  beings  light  up  these  fires  for  him  for  ever”,  can  be 
possible  only  if  these  are  independent  of  rites.  Just  as  in  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  performed  with  the  organ  of 
speech  and  the  vital  force,  through  an  act  of  mental  super¬ 
imposition,  it  is  first  said,  “Then  he  offers  the  vital  force  to 
the  organ  of  speech,  then  he  offers  the  organ  of  speech  to  the 
vital  force”  (Kau.  II.  5),  and  then  it  is  said,  “He  offers  these 
two  unending  immortal  oblations  for  ever  in  wakefulness  and 
sleep”  (ibid.),  similar  is  the  case  here.  But  if  the  fires  formed 
parts  of  rites,  they  would  not  have  been  thought  of  as  being 
used  continuously,  since  their  application  in  rites  would  have 
lasted  only  for  a  short  time.  And  it  cannot  be  reasonably  held 
that  this  is  a  mere  eulogy.  For  a  simple  declaration  (without 
clear  injunction)  of  anything  can  properly  be  accepted  as  a 
eulogy  only  where  one  comes  across  distinct  indicative  marks 
etc.  pointing  out  an  (independent)  injunction.  But  since  no 
other  clear  injunction  is  discernible  here,  the  application  of  these 
meditations  has  to  be  inferred  from  the  mere  declaration  itself. 
And  that  can  be  inferred  only  in  conformity  with  the  declara¬ 
tion;  therefore,  by  noticing  the  continuous  application  of  the 
fires,  they  have  to  be  inferred  to  be  continuous.  From  this  it 
follows  that  in  keeping  with  this  situation,  these  fires  stand 
proved  as  independent  of  rites.  Hereby  is  explained  the  text, 
“That  being  so,  whatever  the  beings  think  of  through  their 
minds,  by  all  that  are  lighted  up  these  very  fires,”  etc.  So  also 
the  syntactical  connection  contained  in,  “for  a  man  of  know¬ 
ledge”,  which  speaks  of  the  connection  of  these  fires  with  a 
distinct  person  only,  militates  against  any  connection  with  a 
sacrifice.  Hence  the  view  about  independence  is  more  weighty. 


3P^7ET-3rcfe¥q:  Owing  to  being  linked  up  (with  the  mind) 
and  such  other  reasons,  (the  mental  fires  are  independent) 
even  as  other  meditations  have  their  separate¬ 
ness.  xf  And  it  is  seen  (that  sacrifices  are  treated  as 
separate);  that  was  stated  (by  Jaimini). 


50.  On  account  of  being  linked  up  with  the  mind  and  such 


736  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  50 

other  reasons ,  the  mental  fires  are  independent  even  as  other 
meditations  are .  And  it  is  seen  that  the  sacrifices  are  treated  as 
independent  ( irrespective  of  their  context ),  as  was  pointed  out 
by  Jaimini. 

The  context  has  to  be  waived  and  the  independence  of  the 
fires,  lighted  up  by  the  mind  etc.,  have  to  be  understood  for 
this  further  reason  that  all  the  subsidiary  acts  presupposed  in  a 
rite  are  linked  up  here  with  the  modes  of  the  mind  etc.  in  the 
text,  “They  (the  fires)  are  established  merely  mentally,  built 
up  mentally  only;  mentally  only  is  the  Soma  vessel  taken  up; 
the  Udgata  sings  the  Sama  (song)  mentally,  the  Hota  recites 
the  hymns  mentally.  And  whatever  else  has  to  be  done  in  this 
sacrifice,  that  is  either  indirectly  or  directly  conducive  to  the 
fulfilment  of  the  sacrifice,  all  that  is  but  mental,  all  that  is  to 
be  done  mentally  (by  the  man  of  knowledge)  in  connection 
with  those  fires  consisting  of  thoughts  and  lighted  up  by  the 
mind”.  This  linking  up  with  the  mind  leads  to  the  conclusion 
that  it  is  all  a  case  of  meditation  through  superimposition.  And 
it  cannot  be  proper  that  anyone  should  hanker  to  get  the 
(material)  accessories  of  a  sacrifice  with  the  help  of  imaginary 
superimposition  when  these  materials  themselves  are  physically 
present.  It  should  not  be  misconceived  here  that  just  like  the 
meditation  on  the  Udgitha  (Ch.  I.  i.  1),  the  mental  fires  are 
connected  with  the  accessories  of  a  sacrifice,  and  so  they  should 
form  parts  of  a  sacrifice;  for  the  Vedic  texts  are  dissimilar.  The 
text  here  does  not  say  that  a  certain  accessory  of  a  rite  is  to  be 
taken  up  and  the  notion  of  such  and  such  a  thing  should  be 
superimposed  on  it;  but  it  merely  selects  the  thirty-six  thousand 
different  mental  moods  and  imagines  them  to  be  fires,  vessels, 
etc.,  just  as  it  is  done  in  the  case  of  a  man  thought  of  as  a  sac¬ 
rifice  (Ch.  III.  xvi.).  As  for  this  number,  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  the  number  as  found  in  the  case  of  the  days  in  the  whole 
span  of  a  man’s  life  is  superimposed  on  the  mental  moods.  Thus 
the  fires  lighted  up  by  the  mind  etc.  are  independent  of  rites 
owing  to  their  being  linked  up  with  the  mind. 

The  portion  “and  such  other  reasons”  (in  the  aphorism),  is 


III.  iii.  50]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  737 

to  be  understood  to  include  “extended  application”  etc.  as  far  as 
possible.  For  instance  the  text,  “each  one  of  them  is  as  great 
as  the  former  (fire  used  in  an  actual  sacrifice)”,  extends  the 
greatness  of  the  fire  in  an  ordinary  sacrifice  to  each  one  of  the 
fires  in  the  meditation,  thereby  showing  a  disregard  for  rites.  It 
cannot  be  argued  that  the  latter  (mental  fires)  can  be  accepted 
as  substitutes  for  the  former  (actual  fires)  on  the  mere  ground 
of  their  having  some  connection  with  rites,  for  the  latter  (con¬ 
ceptual  fires)  cannot  be  helpful  to  a  rite  in  the  very  same  way 
as  the  former  (actual)  fire  is  by  holding  the  offering,  and  so  on. 
As  for  the  assertion  that  the  argument  about  extension  of  appli¬ 
cation  confirms  the  opponent’s  view  as  well,  inasmuch  as  an 
application  of  the  method  of  extension  is  possible  where  there 
is  a  similarity,  that  (argument)  is  refuted  by  pointing  out  that 
in  our  view  also  there  is  the  similarity  of  both  being  fires,  for 
even  the  imaginary  fires  are  fires.  The  other  reasons  like  “express 
statement”  have  already  been  advanced. 

Thus  owing  to  such  reasons  as  being  linked  up  with  the  mind, 
the  fires  lighted  up  by  the  mind  etc.  are  independent  of  rites 
even  as  other  meditations  are  independent.  As  other  meditations, 
for  instance,  the  “meditation  of  Saodilya”,  which  being  linked 
up  with  their  respective  related  objects,  are  certainly  different 
from  rites  and  are  also  separate  from  other  meditations,  similar 
is  the  case  here.  Moreover,  it  is  seen  that  the  rite  called  Ave§ti, 
read  of  in  the  context  of  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice,  has  more  excel¬ 
lence  (e.g.  wider  use)  than  the  context  warrants,  since  it  is 
linked  up  with  the  three  castes,  whereas  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice 
has  to  be  performed  by  the  kings  alone.  This  has  been  stated  in 
the  Purva-Mlmamsa  in  the  aphorism,  “If  it  be  argued  that  the 
Ave&i  sacrifice  forms  a  part  of  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice,  then  we 
say  that  it  is  not  so,  since  the  Avesti  is  associated  with  the  three 
castes”48  (XI.  iv.  7). 

48  In  the  course  of  prescribing  the  Rajasuya  sacrifice,  the  Avesti  sacrifice, 
to  be  performed  by  the  three  castes  is  mentioned.  The  Rajasuya  is  to  be 
performed  by  a  Ksatriya  only,  but  the  Avesti  can  be  performed  by 
Brahmanas,  Ksatriyas,  and  Vaisyas.  Hence  it  is  independent  of  and  better 
than  the  Rajasuya. 

47 


738 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  51 


Not  arfq  even  *niRT?*IR[  on  the  ground  of  similarity  (the 
mental  fires  become  parts  of  rites)  for  it  is  noticed 

(that  they  are  useful  to  a  man)  as  it  is  in  the  case  of 

death;  for  sffar-srrq'fa:  the  (heavenly)  world  does  not 
become  (fire,  because  of  similarity). 


51.  Not  even  on  the  ground  of  similarity  can  the  mental  fires 
become  subservient  to  ritesy  since  they  are  noticed  to  serve 
hitman  needs>  just  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  death ;  for  the  world 
does  not  become  fire  just  because  of  a  similarity. 


It  was  stated  (by  the  opponent)  that  like  the  imaginary  Soma 
juice  etc.  the  mental  fires  are  but  substitutes  for  the  fire  used  in 
the  actual  sacrifice  (III.  iii.  45).  That  is  being  refuted.  Not  even 
from  the  similarity  with  the  imaginary  Soma  etc.  are  the  fires, 
lighted  up  by  the  mind  etc.,  to  be  considered  parts  of  a  rite, 
since  from  the  reasons  like  “express  statement”,  adduced  earlier, 
they  are  seen  to  serve  merely  human  purposes  (i.e.  of  the 
aspirant).40  Not  that  something  cannot  be  similar  to  something 
else  in  some  respect;  but  its  individual  distinction  is  not  oblit¬ 
erated  thereby,  as  in  the  case  of  death.  Thus  in  the  texts  “This 
very  Being  indeed,  that  is  in  the  solar  orb,  is  Death”  (Sa.  B.  X. 
v.  2.3),  and  “Fire  is  Death”  (Bp.  III.  ii.  10),  the  word  Death  is 
used  equally  for  fire  and  the  Being  in  the  sun;  yet  they  do  not 
become  absolutely  the  same.  Again,  just  as  in  the  text,  “O 
Gautama,  the  other  world  is  surely  a  fire,  and  of  this  the  sun  is 
the  fuel”  (Ch.  V.  iv.  1),  the  world  does  not  become  a  fire  just 
because  of  the  analogy  of  fuel  etc.,  so  also  is  the  case  here. 


q^r  ^  s&m  cnfsw  wiw:  u^n 

According  to  the  subsequent  ( brdhmana  text)  also 
(is  known  that)  5T53TFT  the  scripture  has  that  injunc¬ 
tion  in  view;  g  but  the  connection  (with  the  actual 

fire)  is  on  account  of  the  abundance  (of  the  attri¬ 

butes  of  the  latter  that  are  imagined). 


40  And  not  the  purposes  of  a  sacrifice. 


III.iii.53] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


739 


52.  From  the  subsequent  brahmana  text  also  it  is  known  that 
the  scripture  has  that  (prescription  of  a  meditation)  in  view; 
but  the  connection  with  fire  occurs  because  of  the  abundance 
of  the  attributes  of  fire  that  have  to  be  imagined  here. 

Even  later  on,  in  the  immediately  subsequent  brahmana  text 
starting  with,  “This  world  is  surely  the  sacrificial  fire  that  is 
lighted  up”,  it  is  gathered  that  “the  scripture  has  that  injunction 
in  view”,  that  the  purpose  of  the  text  is  merely  to  enjoin  a 
meditation,  and  not  imparting  any  injunction  about  any  purely 
subsidiary  part  of  a  ritual.  Even  there  occurs  the  verse,  “They 
ascend  there  through  meditation  where  all  desires  get  van¬ 
quished.  People  proceeding  by  the  Southern  Path  do  not  reach 
there,  nor  even  the  ignorant  people  engaged  in  austerities”  (Sa. 
B.),  in  which  this  very  fact  is  shown  by  condemning  mere  rites 
and  praising  meditation.  Similarly  also  even  in  the  earlier 
brahmana  text  starting  with,  “this  (solar)  orb  that  scatters  heat” 
(Sa.  B.  II.  v.  2.23),  the  predominance  of  meditation  is  noticeable 
and  not  that  of  rites,  since  the  conclusion  is  made  with  the 
words,  “He  who  has  Death  as  his  Self,  becomes  immortal”,  which 
state  the  result  of  meditation.  (In  common  with  them)  this  must 
be  the  case  here  as  well  (in  the  middle  portion)  because  of 
similarity  with  them.  On  account  of  the  further  reason,  how¬ 
ever,  that  quite  a  number  of  attributes  of  the  sacrificial  fire  are 
to  be  imagined  in  this  meditation,  the  meditation  is  linked  up 
with  that  fire;  but  this  is  not  done  so  owing  to  its  being  a  part 
of  any  rite.  Hence  it  is  established  that  the  fires  lighted  up  by 
the  mind  etc.  constitute  nothing  but  a  meditation. 

Topic  30:  The  Self  Distinct  from  Body 

^  3nr*Fn  srcft  11*311 

tr%  Some  (deny)  the  soul’s  (existence)  owing 

to  its  existence  when  the  body  is. 

53.  Some  deny  the  existence  of  the  soul ,  its  existence  being 
dependent  on  the  existence  of  the  body. 


740  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  53 

The  existence  of  the  soul,  as  distinct  from  the  body,  is  being 
confirmed  here  in  order  to  establish  its  aptitude  for  bondage  and 
liberation.  For  if  there  be  no  soul,  distinct  from  the  body,  there 
can  be  no  logicality  for  imparting  instruction  about  results  to 
be  attained  in  the  other  world;  and  in  that  case,  for  whom  can 
it  be  taught  that  his  soul  is  identical  with  Brahman? 

Opponent :  In  the  very  beginning  of  the  scripture  (of  Purva- 
Mimamsa),  in  the  first  chapter,  the  existence  of  the  soul, 
competent  to  enjoy  the  fruits  mentioned  in  the  scriptures  and 
distinct  from  the  body,  was  spoken  of. 

Vedantin :  True  it  has  been  said  so  by  the  commentator;  but 
no  aphorism  occurs  there  about  the  existence  of  the  soul, 
whereas  here  the  existence  of  that  soul  is  established  by  the 
aphorist  himself  after  raising  a  doubt  about  its  existence.  When 
the  teacher  SabarasvamI  discussed  the  existence  of  the  soul  in 
connection  with  the  characteristics  of  valid  means  of  proof  in 
the  Purva-Mlmamsa,  he  drew  upon  this  aphorism  itself.  And  it 
is  for  this  reason  that  the  great  Upavar$a  cited  this  one  by  saying, 
“We  shall  discuss  this  in  the  Vedanta-Sutra”,  when  the  occasion 
arose  in  the  Purva-Mlmaihsa  to  speak  of  the  existence  of  the 
Self.50 

Now,  here,  in  the  course  of  discussion  of  the  meditations  got 
from  injunctions,  this  existence  of  the  soul  is  being  considered 
in  order  to  show  that  this  question  underlies  all  the  scriptures. 
Moreover,  under  the  previous  topic  it  was  taken  for  granted 
that  something  could  be  taken  apart  from  its  context,  and 
thereby  it  was  shown  that  the  fires  lighted  by  the  mind  etc. 
are  conducive  to  human  good  (by  forming  parts  of  meditation). 
It  having  become  necessary  now  to  explain  who  that  aspirant 
is  and  for  whose  sake  these  fires  lighted  by  the  mind  etc.  exist, 
it  is  being  stated  here  that  the  soul  has  its  existence  apart  from 
the  body.  This  first  aphorism  is  presented  by  way  of  doubting 
that  existence,  the  idea  being  that  when  the  statement  of  refuta- 

80  When  the  truth  of  the  text,  “the  sacrifice^  armed  with  sacrifices,  goes 
to  heaven”,  had  to  be  proved  by  showing  the  existence  of  the  soul  and 
no  aphorism  was  in  evidence  in  the  Purva-Mlmamsa,  SabarasvamI  had  to 
depend  on  the  present  aphorism.  That  he  did  so,  is  clear  from  what 
Upavarsa  says. 


III.  iii.  54]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  741 

tion  comes  after  raising  the  doubt,  it  produces  a  firm  conviction 
about  the  subject-matter  presented,  on  the  analogy  of  driving 
in  a  peg.51 

(Opponent :)  With  regard  to  this,  there  are  some  materialists 
who  identify  the  soul  with  the  body  itself,  and  think  that  there 
is  no  soul  distinct  from  the  body.  Under  this  belief  they  consider 
it  possible  that  although  sentience  is  not  seen  to  belong  to  the 
external  things  like  earth  etc.  taken  either  individually  or  col¬ 
lectively,  yet  it  may  belong  to  the  elements  transformed  into 
bodies,  and  they  say  that  sentience  is  but  consciousness  arising 
from  them  like  the  power  of  intoxication  (existing  imperceptibly 
in  betels  etc.),  and  that  a  man  is  nothing  but  the  body  dowered 
with  sentience.  They  also  assert  that  apart  from  the  body,  there 
is  no  soul  able  to  attain  either  heaven  or  liberation,  and  that  the 
body  itself  is  both  sentience  and  soul.  They  adduce  this  reason: 
“its  existence  being  dependent  on  the  existence  of  the  body”. 
Anything  whose  existence  depends  on  the  existence  of  another, 
and  which  ceases  to  be  when  that  other  thing  is  not  there,  is 
ascertained  to  be  an  attribute  of  the  latter,  as  for  instance,  heat 
and  light  are  attributes  of  fire.  As  regards  such  attributes  as  the 
activities  of  the  vital  force,  sentience,  memory,  etc.,  which  are 
held  to  belong  to  the  soul  according  to  the  believers  in  the  soul, 
they  too  are  perceived  within  the  body  and  not  outside;  and 
hence  so  long  as  any  substance  other  than  the  body  cannot  be 
proved,  they  must  be  the  attributes  of  the  body  itself.  Hence 
the  soul  is  not  distinct  from  the  body. 

Vedantin  :  Under  such  a  predicament  we  say: 

W ifac'UST  1 1^*1 1 

g  But  q-  not  so;  (there  is)  distinction 

anrrfa^kj;  because  of  non-existence  (of  consciousness)  even 
when  that  (body)  exists,  as  in  perception. 

54.  But  this  is  not  so;  there  is  a  distinction  (between  the  soul 
and  the  body)  because  consciousness  may  not  exist  even  when 
the  body  exists ,  as  it  is  in  the  case  of  perception . 

61  When  driving  in  a  post  into  soft  ground,  one  repeatedly  pulls  it  out 
and  forces  it  into  the  ground,  so  that  it  may  get  fixed  deep  and  firm. 


742 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[Ill.iii.  54 


But  the  fact  is  not  as  it  is  stated,  viz  that  the  soul  is  not  distinct 
from  the  body.  For  it  must  be  distinct  from  the  body,  “since 
consciousness  does  not  exist  even  when  the  body  is  there”.  If 
from  the  fact  that  the  attributes  of  the  soul  exist  when  the  body 
exists,  you  infer  that  those  attributes  belong  to  the  body,  then 
why  should  it  not  also  be  inferred  that  they  are  not  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  the  body  owing  to  their  non-existence  even  when  the 
body  is  present,  they  being  different  from  the  characteristics  of 
the  body?  For  attributes  like  form  (or  colour)  etc.,  which 
belong  to  the  body,  may  very  well  last  as  long  as  the  body 
persists;  but  such  characteristics  as  the  activities  of  the  vital 
force  do  not  occur  after  death  even  though  the  body  exists. 
And  such  attributes  of  the  body  as  form  (or  colour)  etc.  are 
perceived  by  others  (outside  the  body),  but  not  so  are  such 
characteristics  of  the  soul  as  consciousness,  memory,  etc.  More¬ 
over,  the  existence  of  these  attributes  can  be  conclusively 
determined  when  the  body  continues  during  a  man’s  life,  but 
their  non-existence  cannot  be  so  determined  from  the  non¬ 
existence  of  the  body.  For  even  when  this  body  has  fallen,  per¬ 
chance  these  attributes  of  the  soul  may  well  persist  by  transfer¬ 
ring  themselves  to  some  other  body.  Even  (if  this  be  a  doubtful 
theory),  that  doubt  can  well  demolish  the  opposite  point  of 
view.  And  the  opponent  has  to  be  asked  as  to  what  he  thinks 
the  nature  of  this  consciousness  to  be  that  he  would  fain  derive 
it  from  the  elements.  For  the  materialists  do  not  accept  any 
principle  over  and  above  the  four  elements  (earth,  water,  fire, 
and  air). 

Opponent :  Consciousness  is  nothing  but  the  perception  of 
the  elements  and  the  derivatives  of  elements. 

Vedantin :  In  that  case  these  elements  etc.  are  objects  of 
perception,  and  hence  sentience  cannot  be  an  attribute  of  these 
elements  etc.,  since  a  thing  cannot  act  on  itself.  For  fire,  though 
possessing  heat,  does  not  bum  itself,  nor  does  an  actor  (or 
acrobat),  trained  though  he  be,  ride  on  his  own  shoulder.  And 
it  cannot  be  that  consciousness  which  is  an  attribute  of  the 
elements  and  their  derivatives,  (and  is  hence  one  with  them), 
will  perceive  those  elements  etc.  For  neither  one’s  own  form 
nor  of  anybody  else  is  perceived  by  forms  etc.,  whereas  external 


m.iii.55] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


743 


elements  and  their  derivatives  are  perceived  by  consciousness. 
Hence  just  as  the  existence  of  this  perception  of  the  elements 
and  their  derivatives  is  admitted,  so  also  must  its  separateness 
from  them  be  admitted.  According  to  us,  the  soul  is  by  nature 
the  very  essence  of  perception  itself;  and  hence  the  soul 
is  distinct  from  the  body;  and  it  is  eternal,  because  conscious¬ 
ness  is  uniform  by  nature.  For,  although  the  soul  comes  to  be 
associated  with  other  states  (i.e.  limiting  adjuncts),  still  in  such 
experiences  as,  “It  is  I  that  saw  this”,  its  identity  as  the  perceiver 
is  recognized;  and  this  identity  has  to  be  admitted  so  that 
memory  etc.  may  be  reasonably  upheld.52  As  for  the  argument 
that  since  consciousness  occurs  in  the  body,  it  must  be  an 
attribute  of  the  body,  that  is  refuted  in  the  way  we  have  already 
shown.  Moreover,  though  perception  takes  place  when  light 
and  other  accessories  are  present,  but  not  when  they  are  absent, 
it  does  not  follow  from  this  that  perception  is  an  attribute  of 
the  light  etc.  That  being  the  case,  it  does  not  follow  that  con¬ 
sciousness  should  be  an  attribute  of  the  body  just  because  it 
occurs  where  the  body  is  present  and  does  not  occur  where  the 
body  is  absent;  for  the  usefulness  of  the  body  can  be  explained 
away  as  serving  merely  the'  purposes  of  an  auxiliary  like  light 
etc.  Furthermore,  the  body  is  not  seen  to  be  an  absolutely 
contributory  factor  in  perception,  since  even  when  this  body 
lies  inactive  in  dream,  many  kinds  of  perception  are  seen  to  take 
place.  Hence  the  existence  of  the  soul  distinct  from  the  body  is 
beyond  criticism. 

Topic  31:  Meditations  Connected  with  Accessories 
of  Rites 

armapraraj  *  %  srfd%^  man 

3PT-3re«reT:  The  (meditations)  connected  with  the  accessories 
(of  rites),  ^  however,  ^  (are)  not  (to  be  confined) 

“In  dream,  a  man  has  no  consciousness  of  the  gross  body;  still  self- 
identity  persists.  Even  if  it  be  argued  that  he  is  conscious  of  his  dream 
body,  then  let  us  take  the  case  of  memory,  wish  etc.,  where  the  identity 
of  the  perceiver  and  the  one  who  remembers  or  wishes  has  to  be  admitted 
perforce. 


744  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  55 

to  the  branches  (of  the  Vedas  where  they  occur);  because 
srfa-iten  (they  are  to  be  adopted)  in  all  the  (branches  of  the) 
Vedas. 

55.  But  the  meditations  connected  with  the  accessories  of  rites 
are  not  to  be  confined  to  the  branches  of  the  Vedas  in  which 
they  obtain ,  for  they  are  to  be  adopted  in  all  the  (branches  of 
the)  Vedas. 

The  topic  of  the  soul  that  cropped  up  incidentally  is  finished. 
Now  we  follow  the  subject  under  discussion. 

Doubt :  Some  meditations  that  are  connected  with  the  acces¬ 
sories  of  rites  like  Udgltha  etc.  and  are  enjoined  in  all  the  Vedas 
in  their  different  branches,  as  for  instance,  “One  shall  meditate 
on  the  letter  Om  as  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  1),  “One  shall  meditate 
on  the  fivefold  Sama  by  superimposing  on  it  the  idea  of  the 
worlds”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  1),  “That  which  people  mention  as  ‘Uktha’, 
(‘Uktha’,  a  hymn  used  as  a  part  of  a  rite)  is  but  this  that  is  the 
earth”  (Ai.  A.  II.  i.  2),  “This  fire  that  is  lighted  (in  the  sacrifice) 
is  but  this  world”  (Sa.  B.  X.  v.  4.1),  and  so  on;  are  these  to 
remain  confined  to  the  Udgltha  etc.  just  as  they  obtain  in  the 
respective  branches,  or  are  they  to  be  extended  to  all  the 
branches?  This  is  the  doubt,  and  it  arises  from  the  fact  that  the 
Udgltha  etc.  differ  from  one  branch  to  another  owing  to  a 
difference  in  their  intonation  etc.  So  what  should  be  the  con¬ 
clusion? 

Oppone?it :  They  are  enjoined  in  connection  with  the  Udgltha 
etc.  as  presented  in  their  own  respective  branches. 

Why? 

Because  of  proximity.  For  the  curiosity  to  know  the  particular 
(Udgltha)  after  hearing  the  text,  “One  shall  meditate  on  Om  as 
the  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  1),  stated  in  a  general  way,  is  removed 
by  the  (proximately)  particularized  (Udgltha)  contained  in  that 
very  branch  itself,  so  that  there  is  no  justification  for  skipping 
over  this  and  borrowing  any  particular  one  from  another 
branch.  Hence  the  meditations  remain  confined  to  the  branches 
where  they  obtain. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says,  “But  the 
meditations,  connected  with  the  accessories”  etc.  The  word 


IILiii.  56] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


745 


“but”  rules  out  the  opponent’s  view.  These  will  not  remain 
confined  each  to  the  branch  of  its  own  Veda,  but  will  extend  to 
all  the  branches. 

Why? 

Because  the  Vedic  text  about  Udgltha  etc.  are  stated  in  a 
general  way.  If  it  be  confined  to  its  own  branch,  then  the  text 
“One  shall  meditate  on  the  Udgltha”,  which  is  stated  in  a  general 
way  and  is  not  meant  for  any  restricted  application,  will  remain 
confined  to  a  particular  context  on  the  strength  of  proximity, 
and  thus  the  general  (express)  statement  will  be  adversely 
affected.  But  this  is  not  proper.  For  an  express  statement  is  more 
authoritative  than  proximity.  It  cannot  also  be  argued  that  no 
concept  (and  hence  meditation)  is  possible  with  regard  to  a 
general  factor.  Hence  though  there  is  a  difference  in  intonation 
etc.  (in  the  different  branches),  still  on  account  of  the  fact  that 
the  Udgltha  is  one  and  the  same,  this  kind  of  meditation  should 
be  undertaken  with  regard  to  the  Udgltha  etc.  in  all  the 
branches. 


JTFsnfersTsfarta:  iiv^ii 

cR  Or  rather  as  in  the  case  of  mantras  etc. 

arfafto:  there  is  no  contradiction. 

56 .  Or  rather  (they  are  to  be  adopted  in  other  branches)  like 
the  mantras;  (and  thus)  there  is  no  contradiction . 

Or  there  is  no  scope  for  any  doubt  as  to  how  the  conceptions 
about  Udgltha  etc.  occurring  in  one  branch  can  apply  to  those 
in  other  branches;  because  it  can  be  shown  that  there  is  no 
contradiction  in  this  even  as  there  is  none  in  the  case  of  mantras 
etc.  For  it  is  seen  that  mantras ,  rites,  and  subsidiaries  occurring 
in  one  branch  are  taken  over  to  some  other  branch.  Thus  even 
for  those  (belonging  to  the  Yajur-Veda)  who  do  not  have  the 
mantra ,  uKu%arurasi  (thou  art  the  kufaruy\  meant  for  use  when 
taking  up  a  stone  pestle  (for  grinding  rice),  the  injunction  for 
its  application  is  seen  to  be  stated  thus:  “He  shall  take  up  the 
stone  with  the  mantra ,  ‘Thou  art  kutariC  or  ‘thou  art  kukkuta' 
(i.e.  cock).”  Similarly  even  for  those  (of  the  Maitrayaria  branch) 


746 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.iii.56 


who  do  not  have  the  scriptural  mention  (in  their  own  branch) 
of  the  subsidiary  sacrifices,  viz  Samidh,  (Tanunapata,  Ida, 
Barhih,  Svahakara),  still  an  injunction  about  the  subsidiaries  (i.e. 
about  their  number)  is  found  there  in  the  text,  “The  five 
Prayajas  (counting  from  Samidh)  are  (equal  in  number  to)  the 
five  seasons  (autumn  and  winter  being  counted  as  one),  and 
they  are  to  be  performed  in  one  and  the  same  place”.  So  also 
for  those  (of  the  Yajur-Veda)  who  have  no  such  mantra  as, 
“The  goat  is  meant  to  be  sacrificed  to  Agni-Soma,”  stating  the 
class  of  the  animal  to  be  sacrificed,  (but  simply  have  the  mantra, 
“He  shall  sacrifice  the  animal  to  Agni-Soma”),  for  them  also  a 
mantra  text  suggestive  of  that  particular  animal  is  found  in  the 
mantra  (recited  by  the  Adhvaryu),  “0(priest  Hotr),  chant  the 
hymn  for  the  offering  of  the  fat  and  marrow  of  the  goat”.  Thus 
also  the  mantras ,  “ Agnerverhotram  veradhvaram — O  Fire, 
promote  the  Hota  and  the  sacrifice”,  originally  occurring  in  the 
Sama-Veda,  is  seen  to  be  applied  to  the  Yajur-Veda.  So  again  the 
mantra ,  “He,  O  people,  is  Indra  who  from  his  birth  was  the 
greatest  in  virtues  and  possessed  of  discrimination”,  originally 
found  in  the  Rg-Veda,  is  seen  to  be  adopted  in  the  Yajur-Veda 
as  noted  in  the  text,  “The  mantra  starting  with,  ‘He,  O  people’, 
is  to  be  used  for  application  by  the  priest  Adhvaryu”.  Thus  as 
the  accessories  of  rites  on  which  meditations  are  based  are  seen 
to  be  adopted  in  all  the  branches,  so  also  should  be  the  medita¬ 
tions  based  on  them.  And  hence  there  is  no  contradiction. 

Topic  32:  Meditation  on  Vaisvanara  as  a  whole 

ff  IWslI 

(Meditation)  tjpt:  on  the  whole  has  greater  impor¬ 
tance  as  in  the  case  of  sacrifices,  for  cPTT  so  (the 

Upani§ad)  shows. 

51.  The  meditation  on  the  'whole  is  of  greater  importance  just 
as  in  the  case  of  sacrifices.  For  so  the  Upanisad  shows. 

Doubt:  The  meditation  on  Vaisvanara  in  parts,  as  also  as  a 


III.  iii.  57  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  747 

whole,  is  heard  of  in  the  anecdote  starting  with,  “Praclnasala, 
son  of  Upamanyu”  (Ch.  V.  xi.  1).  As  for  the  meditation  on 
partial  aspects,  it  occurs  in  such  texts  as,  “(A£vapati  Kekaya 
asked),  ‘O  son  of  Upamanyu,  on  what  do  you  meditate  as  the 
Self?’  He  said,  ‘O  venerable  king,  I  meditate  on  heaven  itself  (as 
Vaisvanara).’  ‘This  Self  that  you  meditate  on  is  (that  aspect  of) 
the  Vaisvanara  Self  called  the  effulgent  one’”  (Ch.  V.  xii.  1), 
and  so  on.  Similarly  also  the  meditation  as  a  whole  occurs  in, 
“Of  this  Vaisvanara  Self,  the  head  is  the  effulgent  heaven,  the 
eye  is  the  sun,  the  vital  force  is  air,  the  trunk  of  the  body  is 
space,  the  bladder  is  water,  and  the  feet  are  the  earth  itself”  (Ch. 
V.  xviii.  2).  With  regard  to  that  the  doubt  arises,  should  there 
be  a  double  meditation  here,  both  in  parts  and  as  a  whole,  or 
should  it  be  only  of  the  whole?  What  should  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  Owing  to  the  use  of  the  predicate  “(you) 
meditate”  in  connection  with  every  limb  counting  from  heaven, 
and  owing  to  the  mention  of  separate  results  as  in,  “In  your 
line  would  be  extracted  the  Soma  juice  (that  is  to  say,  the  Soma 
sacrifice  will  be  performed)  well  and  plentifully”  (Ch.  V.  xii. 
1),  the  conclusion  to  be  drawn  is  that  the  meditations  are  to 
proceed  in  parts. 

Veddntin :  Hence  it  is  said:  The  idea  intended  to  be  imparted 
in  this  text  ought  to  be,  “a  greater  importance”,  because  of  the 
pre-eminence  of  the  entire  thing,  viz  of  the  meditation  on 
Vaisvanara  as  a  whole,  comprising  all  His  parts;  but  the  idea  is 
not  of  the  meditation  on  the  limbs  separately.  This  is  “as  it  is  in 
the  case  of  sacrifices” — this  is  just  as  it  is  in  such  sacrifices  as 
the  DarSa-Puroamasa  etc.  where  an  integral  act,  comprising  the 
principal  sacrifice  and  its  limbs  as  a  whole  is  intended,  but  not 
so  the  separate  performance  of  Prayaja  etc.,  nor  even  the  per¬ 
formance  of  the  principal  sacrifice  along  with  a  particular  part 
alone. 

Why  so? 

“Because  of  the  greater  importance  of  the  whole.  Thus  it  is 
that  the  text  shows  the  pre-eminence  of  the  whole  inasmuch  as 
the  whole  text  is  seen  to  imply  a  single  idea;  for  from  a  consid¬ 
eration  of  the  sequence  of  the  narration  it  becomes  clear  that 
it  imparts  a  single  idea  about  the  meditation  on  Vaisvanara.  Thus 


748  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iii.  57 

it  is  seen  that  the  narration  begins  with  the  statement  that  six 
seers  counting  from  Pracinasala  to  Uddalaka,  who  were  not 
able  to  arrive  at  any  complete  knowledge  about  the  meditation 
on  VaiSvanara  approached  Asvapati,  king  of  the  Kekayas.  Then 
we  are  told  one  by  one  of  heaven  etc.  meditated  on  by  these 
sages  separately.  Later  on  the  text  teaches  that  these  are  but 
head  etc.  of  Vaisvanara  in  such  sentences  as,  “  ‘But  this  is  only 
the  head  of  that  Self  said  he”  (Ch.  V.  xii.  2),  and  it  condemns 
the  separate  meditations  in  such  sentences  as,  “Had  you  not 
come  to  me,  your  head  would  have  dropped  off”  (ibid.).  Again, 
turning  back  from  the  separate  meditations  and  following  the 
meditation  on  the  total  aspect,  the  text  shows  the  result  pertain¬ 
ing  to  the  whole  in  the  sentence,  “He  eats  food  in  all  the  worlds 
through  all  beings  and  through  all  the  souls”  (Ch.  V.  xviii.  1). 
As  for  the  mention  of  results  individually  in  respect  of  medita¬ 
tions  on  heaven  etc.,  these  are  to  be  considered  from  this  point 
of  view  as  pertaining  to  the  parts  of  a  whole,  but  getting  united 
in  that  whole  which  is  the  principal  factor.  Similarly  the  use  of 
the  predicate,  “(you)  meditate”  (by  Asvapati)  in  relation  to 
each  “limb”  (of  Vaisvanara)  is  meant  simply  as  a  reiteration  of 
the  other’s  idea  (i.e.  of  the  sage  he  is  speaking  to),  but  it  is  not 
meant  for  prescribing  a  partial  meditation.  Hence  the  view 
advocating  the  meditation  as  a  whole  is  more  weighty. 

Some,  however,  while  establishing  here  the  view  that  the 
meditation  on  the  whole  is  more  weighty,  argue  on  the  very 
basis  of  the  term  “greater  importance”  that  the  meditation  on 
the  limbs  is  also  approved  by  the  aphorist.  But  that  is  improper. 
For  when  a  unity  of  idea  is  palpable,  it  is  improper  to  resort  to 
a  splitting  of  that  unity  (by  assuming  two  meanings  for  the  same 
passage).  Moreover,  that  would  run  counter  to  such  deprecating 
sentences  as,  “your  head  would  have  dropped  off”  (Ch.  V.  xii. 
2)  etc.  Furthermore,  when  the  meditation  as  a  whole  becomes 
clear  from  the  conclusion,  it  is  not  possible  to  deny  it  from  the 
point  of  view  of  the  opponent.  Besides,  the  statement  about 
“greater  importance”  in  the  aphorism  may  well  be  justified  as 
meant  for  showing  the  greater  validity  of  the  entire  meditation 
as  compared  with  the  partial  meditation. 


III. iii.58]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  749 

Topic  33:  When  Meditations  Differ 

(The  meditations  are)  different  in  accor¬ 

dance  as  terminology  etc.  differ. 

58.  The  meditations  are  different  when  there  is  a  difference  in 
terminology  etc . 

Opponent :  Under  the  earlier  topic  it  was  stated  that  the 
meditation  on  the  whole  is  better  in  spite  of  the  mention  of 
separate  results  for  meditations  on  heaven  etc.  From  this  the 
idea  crops  up  that  other  meditations  also,  even  though  occurring 
in  different  Upani$adic  texts,  have  to  be  undertaken  in  a 
combined  form.  Moreover,  when  the  entity  meditated  on  is  the 
same,  the  meditations  cannot  be  cognized  as  different.  Even  as 
the  articles  and  gods  (associated  with  a  sacrifice)  determine  the 
nature  of  a  sacrifice,  so  also  the  entity  meditated  on  determines 
the  nature  of  the  meditation.  And  although  the  Upani$adic  texts 
differ,  the  object  of  meditation  is  known  in  the  following  texts 
to  be  the  same  God  alone:  “Identified  with  the  mind  and  having 
Prana  as  the  body”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2),  “ Ka  (Bliss)  is  Brahman, 
Kha  (Space)  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  x.  5),  “Having  inevitable 
desire  and  irresistible  will”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  5),  and  so  on;  similarly 
also  in,  “Prifya  is  but  one”,  “ Prana  is  the  place  of  merger”  (Ch. 

IV.  iii.  3),  “Prifya  is  indeed  the  first-born  and  the  foremost” 
(Ch.  V.  i.  1),  “ Prana  is  the  father,  and  Prltya  the  mother”  (Ch. 
VII.  xv.  1),  and  so  on,  where  wc  gather  from  the  Upani$ad 
the  oneness  of  the  meditation  owing  to  the  oneness  of  the  object 
of  meditation.  From  this  point  of  view  the  diversity  of  the 
Upani$adic  texts  is  not  useless,  since  these  texts  are  concerned 
with  stating  the  different  characteristics  (of  the  same  entity 
involved  in  a  meditation).  Hence  for  the  completion  of  a  medi¬ 
tation,  all  the  characteristics  prescribed  in  either  one’s  own 
branch  or  other  branches  with  regard  to  the  same  object  of 
meditation  have  to  be  combined  together. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  holds:  “The 
meditations  are  different”  etc.  Even  though  the  object  of  medi- 


750  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iii.58 

tation  be  the  same,  still  the  meditations  of  this  class  ought  to  be 
different. 

Why? 

“Because  of  the  difference  of  terminology  etc.”,  inasmuch  as 
such  difference  of  terminology  is  met  with  as  “ veda  (knows)”, 
“ updsita  (should  meditate)”,  “ sa  kratum  kurvita  (He  shall  make 
a  resolve)”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  1),  and  so  on.  And  it  was  ascertained 
earlier  (in  Purva-Mlmamsa  II.  ii.  1),  that  a  difference  in  terminol¬ 
ogy  causes  a  difference  in  the  rites:  “when  there  is  a  difference 
of  words  (conveying  different  ideas,  e.g.  yajati ,  dadati,  juhoti— 
sacrifices,  gives,  pours  oblation),  the  rites  differ,  since  they  are 
accepted  as  denoting  separate  actions”.  From  the  use  of  “etc.”  in 
the  aphorism  it  follows  that  attributes  etc.  are  also  to  be  under¬ 
stood  as  making  difference  in  rites  as  far  as  possible.53 

Opponent :  In  the  case  of  such  words  as  “veda”,  a  mere 
difference  of  form  is  noticed,  but  there  is  no  difference  of 
meaning  like  “yajati  (sacrifices)”,  etc.,  since  veda  etc.  imply  the 
same  mental  mood,  and  since  no  other  meaning  is  possible.54 
So  how  can  a  difference  in  words  lead  to  a  difference  in  medi¬ 
tations? 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  fault,  since  even  though  there  may  be 
no  difference  as  regards  the  mental  mode  implied,  still  a  differ¬ 
ence  may  arise  from  the  things  they  are  linked  up  with.65 
Though  God,  who  is  to  be  meditated  on,  is  the  same,  still 
different  and  exclusive  attributes  are  taught  about  Him  in 
different  contexts.  Similarly  even  though  Prana ,  as  an  object  of 
meditation,  is  the  same  in  different  contexts,  it  is  to  be  meditated 
on  in  one  context  as  possessed  of  some  attributes,  and  in  another 
context  as  possessed  of  still  others.  Thus  from  the  fact  that  the 

“The  meditations  are  different  according  to  the  (1)  different  charac¬ 
teristics  attributed  to  the  object  in  different  contexts,  (2)  the  difference 
of  results,  (3)  difference  of  names,  or  (4)  impossibility  of  combining  all 
the  characteristics. 

54  Vid  may  either  imply  knowledge  or  meditation;  but  no  injunction 
about  knowledge  is  possible,  and  hence  veda  means  “meditates”. 

“Sacrifice,  gift,  pouring  oblation,  etc.  do  not  differ  as  meaning  acts; 
yet  they  have  their  specific  differences.  So  “ veda”,  “ upasita ”  etc.  may  not 
differ  as  mental  moods,  and  yet  may  differ  for  reasons  shown  in  an  earlier 
footnote  (53). 


ill.  iii.  59]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  751 

injunctions  differ  in  accordance  with  the  chain  of  things  with 
which  an  object  is  linked  up,  the  meditations  also  come  to  be 
known  as  separate.  And  it  cannot  be  argued  that  in  such  a  case, 
one  is  the  injunction  about  meditation,  while  the  others  are 
subsidiary  injunctions  (about  attributes);  for  there  is  no  reason 
determining  such  a  division.  Again,  since  the  attributes  are  quite 
numerous  in  each  context,  it  is  not  proper  to  call  into  service 
some  meditation  already  known  and  add  to  it  the  different 
attributes  (in  the  different  contexts,  for  that  will  lead  to  a  break 
in  the  unity  of  idea).  And  from  the  (opponent’s)  point  of  view, 
there  is  no  justification  for  the  repeated  mention  of  such 
qualities  as  possession  of  “inevitable  desires”  etc.,  since  they  are 
the  same.  Besides,  these  cannot  be  combined  under  a  single  idea, 
since  in  every  context  each  separate  text  proceeds  like  this, 
“One  desirous  of  such  a  result  shall  meditate  thus”,  and  “one 
who  desires  such  another  result  shall  meditate  thus”,  which  leave 
no  lacunae  to  be  filled  up  by  borrowing  from  another  context. 
And  unlike  the  injunction  about  the  meditation  on  Vaisvanara 
as  a  whole,  there  is  no  injunction  about  meditation  as  a  whole 
in  the  cases  of  “the  meditation  of  SaridHya”  and  so  on,  on  the 
strength  of  which  the  meditations  occurring  in  the  different 
contexts  could  have  become  subsidiary  meditations  and  could 
have  been  thus  combined  to  give  rise  to  a  composite  idea.  But 
if  any  such  absolute  assertion  is  made  that  in  all  cases  of  the 
sameness  of  the  object  of  meditation,  the  meditation  also  must 
be  one  and  the  same,  then  one  will  be  undertaking  the  impossible 
task  of  combining  all  the  characteristics  (everywhere).  Hence 
it  is  well  said,  “The  meditations  arc  different  when  there  is  a 
difference  in  terminology”.  Of  course  it  is  to  be  understood 
that  the  topic  of  the  unity  of  idea  in  the  Upani$ads  (III.  iii.  1-4), 
proceeds  by  assuming  that  this  topic  is  already  in  existence.56 

Topic  34:  Alternative  Meditations 

IIKfcll 

(Any  one  meditation  is)  an  alternative  (for  others), 

“Logically  this  topic  should  head  this  chapter,  though  it  crops  up  here 
as  a  side  issue  connected  with  other  topics. 


752 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[m.iii.  59 


because  of  the  indistinguishability  (i.e.  same¬ 
ness)  of  result. 

59 .  Any  one  meditation  ( can  be  accepted  as)  an  alternative 
for  other  meditations ,  because  their  result  is  the  same . 

Doubt :  It  having  been  established  that  the  meditations  differ, 
now  it  is  being  considered  whether  the  aspirant  has  the  option 
to  undertake  them  collectively  or  alternatively  just  as  he  pleases, 
or  it  is  compulsory  to  choose  only  one  of  these  alternatives. 

Opponent :  Among  these  alternatives,  there  is  no  reason  in 
evidence  that  can  decide  in  favour  of  a  compulsory  combination, 
since  the  difference  of  meditations  is  an  established  fact. 

Objection:  But  such  rites  as  Agnihotra,  Darsa-Purnamasa, 
etc.,  are  seen  to  be  combined  regularly,  even  though  they  are 
divergent. 

Opponent :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  since  in  respect  of  those 
rites  there  is  a  scriptural  prescription  about  their  regular  combi¬ 
nation;  but  in  respect  of  these  meditations  no  such  scriptural 
text  about  regular  combination  exists..  Hence  there  can  be  no 
compulsion  about  combination.  Nor  can  there  be  any  compul¬ 
sion  about  accepting  only  one  from  among  them;  for  if  a  man 
is  qualified  for  one  meditation  he  is  not  debarred  thereby  from 
another.  As  a  last  alternative  the  meditations  can  be  adopted 
indiscriminately. 

Objection :  Since  these  meditations  have  the  same  result,  they 
should  logically  be  considered  alternatives  to  be  chosen  from. 
Thus  it  is  noticed  that  the  meditations  contained  in,  “identified 
with  the  mind  and  having  Prana  as  the  body”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2), 
“Bliss  is  Brahman,  Space  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  x.  5),  “having 
unfailing  desire,  and  irresistible  resolve”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  5),  and 
other  texts,  have  the  same  result  consisting  in  the  realization  of 
God. 

Opponent :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  since  it  is  seen  in  the 
case  of  rites  leading  to  heaven  that  though  they  bear  similar 
results,  yet  are  undertaken  according  to  the  option  (of  the 
aspirants). 

Vedantin :  Thus  the  conclusion  being  that  the  meditations  are 
to  be  undertaken  indiscriminately  (but  not  collectively  or  only 


m.  iii.  60]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  753 

one  out  of  many),  it  is  being  said:  Any  one  of  the  meditations 
is  individually  as  good  as  the  others;  and  no  combination  is 
needed. 

Why? 

Since  the  result  is  the  same.  For  the  result  of  these  meditations 
consisting  in  the  direct  perception  of  the  object  of  meditation, 
is  the  same  and  when  the  perception  of  the  object  of  medita¬ 
tion,  be  it  God  or  any  other  entity,  occurs  as  result  of  a  single 
meditation,  the  other  meditations  become  useless.  Moreover,  the 
theory  of  combination  will  lead  to  an  impossibility  of  direct 
perception,  since  such  a  combination  will  lead  to  distraction 
of  the  mind.  And  the  result,  viz  illumination  that  is  achievable 
through  direct  perception,  is  shown  in  such  Upani$adic  texts  as, 
“An  aspirant  who  has  such  a  vision  (that  he  is  Brahman),  and  has 
no  doubt,  attains  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  4),  “becoming  God 
(in  this  life)  he  attains  Godhood  (even  after  death)”  (Bjr.  IV.  i. 
2)  etc.,  as  also  by  Smjtis  in  such  texts  as,  “continuously  engaged 
in  His  thoughts”  (Gita,  VIII.  6),  and  so  on.57  So  an  aspirant 
should  choose  one  of  the  meditations,  bearing  the  same  result; 
and  he  should  continue  in  it  wholeheartedly  till  he  attains  the 
result  through  the  direct  perception  of  the  object  of  medita¬ 
tion. 


Topic  35:  Meditations  Yielding  Worldly  Results 

liv>|| 

q  But  «nr«ir:  the  meditations  yielding  desired  (worldly) 
results  (either)  will  be  combined  m  or  st  not  q*rr- 

at  will,  3V-|q-aniraT^  since  the  previous  reason  does  not 

exist. 

60.  As  for  the  meditations  (based  on  symbols  and)  under¬ 
taken  for  fulfilment  of  worldly  desires,  they  may  be  either 

57  The  aphorism  deals  with  aham-graha-updsana ,  meditation  based  on 
self-identity  with  divinity.  The  opponent  can  argue  that  these  meditations 
yield  results  through  adrfta  just  like  rites;  and  hence  direct  perception  is 
uncalled  for.  But  the  texts  quoted  show  that  ahcrrit-graha-updsand  leads  to 
direct  perception. 

48 


754  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii.  60 

combined  or  not  combined  according  to  one's  optiony  since  the 
previous  reason  (of  sameness  of  result)  does  not  exist . 

The  present  aphorism  is  by  way  of  illustrating  the  opposite 
of  what  was  stated  under,  “because  their  result  is  the  same” 
(III.  iii.  59).  In  meditations  (through  symbols)  which  are  under¬ 
taken  for  prosperity  etc.,  as  mentioned  in  such  texts  as,  “One 
who  knows  thus  that  Air  is  the  calf  of  the  directions,  does  not 
have  to  lament  for  the  death  of  a  son”  (Ch.  III.  xv.  2),  “He  who 
meditates  on  names  as  Brahman,  moves  about  freely  at  will  in 
all  places  where  names  exist”  (Ch.  VIII.  1.  5),  and  so  on,  and 
which  like  rites  yield  their  own  fruits  by  being  first  converted 
into  adrsta  (unseen  potential  result),  there  is  no  expectancy  of 
direct  perception.  These  may  be  combined  or  not  combined  at 
will,  “since  the  previous  reason  does  not  exist”,  “since  the 
previous  reason”,  viz  possession  of  the  same  result,  “does  not 
exist”  here  to  determine  an  alternative  adoption  at  will. 

Topic  36:  Meditations  Based  on  Subsidiaries 

3t‘5*|  *w\*sprm:  n\\n 

ant^In  the  cases  of  (meditations  based  on)  the  subsidiaries, 
^n’-STT^-^TR:  ^eir  position  is  the  same  as  of  their  bases. 

61.  In  the  cases  of  the  meditations  based  on  the  subsidiaries 
(of  rites),  their  position  is  the  same  as  of  their  bases. 

Opponent :  The  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  conceptions 
prescribed  in  the  three  Vedas  in  connection  with  Udgltha  etc., 
which  are  the  subsidiaries  of  rites,  are  to  be  combined  or  they 
are  to  be  undertaken  at  will.  The  aphorist  says  that  “their  posi¬ 
tion  is  the  same  as  those  of  their  bases”.  As  their  bases,  viz  the 
hymns  etc.,  are  applied  in  groups,  so  also  must  be  the  concepts 
in  a  meditation,  for  the  concepts  are  determined  by  their  bases. 

fw*r  UVJH 

62.  (The  meditations  are  to  be  combined ),  also  because  they 
are  enjoined  (in  the  Vedas). 


III.  iii.  64]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  755 

Opponent :  Just  as  the  bases  of  the  meditations,  viz  hymns 
etc.,  are  enjoined  in  the  Vedas,  so  also  are  the  meditations  based 
on  them.  Even  from  the  point  of  view  of  instruction  there  is 
no  difference  between  the  accessories  of  rites  and  the  concep¬ 
tions  based  on  them.58  This  is  the  meaning. 

Wfl^RI^  ll^ll 

63.  (The  meditations  are  to  be  combined)  because  of  the 
(indicatory  mark  of  the)  rectification  (of  one  'with  the  help  of 
another). 

Opponent :  The  greatness  of  the  knowledge  of  the  sameness 
of  Om  and  Udgltha  is  stated  in  the  text,  (by  virtue  of  his  medi¬ 
tation  on  the  unity  of  the  Om  of  the  Rg-Veda  with  the  Udgltha 
of  Sama-Veda)  “The  priest  Udgata  (of  the  Sama-Veda)  recti¬ 
fies  any  defect  occurring  in  (his  own)  singing  of  the  Udgltha 
by  borrowing  from  the  well-performed  act  of  the  priest  Hota 
(of  the  Rg-Veda)”  (Ch.  I.  v.  5).  While  stating  here  that  by 
virtue  of  the  strength  of  that  knowledge  the  Udgata  rectifies 
the  defects  in  his  own  act  by  borrowing  from  the  good  action 
of  the  Hota,  the  text  implies  through  this  indicatory  sign  that 
the  conception  mentioned  in  one  Upanisad  is  to  be  added  to  the 
conceptions  found  in  other  Upani§ads  on  the  basis  of  a  common 
relationship  with  the  object  of  meditation  spoken  of  elsewhere. 

uvni 

t*  And  from  the  Upani§adic  declaration  that 

(Om  which  is)  an  accessory  of  rites  is  common  to  all. 

64.  And  from  the  Upanifadic  declaration  that  Omy  'which  is 
an  accessory  of  the  Vedic  rites  is  common  to  all  the  Vedas,  (it 
follows  that  the  meditations  based  on  it  must  co-exist). 

Opponent :  And  although  Om  enters  as  an  attribute,  that  is  to 
say,  though  Om  supplies  a  basis  for  the  meditation  on  Udgltha, 
the  Upani$ad  declares  it  to  be  common  to  all  the  Vedas  in,  “The 

“The  meditations  are  to  be  combined  like  the  accessories,  since  they 
are  enjoined  similarly. 


756  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iii. 64 

rites  enjoined  in  the  three  Vedas  start  with  the  utterance  of 
Om.  One  chants  hymns  to  gods  after  the  utterance  of  Om; 
uttering  Om  one  praises  the  gods;  by  uttering  Om  one  sings  the 
Udgitha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  9).  From  noticing  thus  that  the  basis  is  the 
same,  it  can  be  inferred  from  this  indicatory  mark,  that  the 
meditations  based  on  this  are  also  the  same. 

Or  the  aphorism  can  be  explained  thus:  If  these  Udgitha  and 
other  things,  constituting  parts  of  rites,  were  not  meant  for  use 
in  all  the  rites,  then  the  conceptions  based  on  them  would  not 
also  have  occurred  together.  But  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  state¬ 
ments  about  application,  which  cover  the  accessories  as  a  whole, 
mention  that  these  Udgitha  and  other  things  are  common  to 
all  the  sacrificial  acts.  Hence  from  the  fact  that  the  bases  are 
common,  it  follows  that  the  meditations  based  on  them  are  also 
to  be  used  collectively. 

\\\V\ 

Or  rather  ^  not;  their  correlation  not 

having  been  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad. 

65.  (The  meditations  are)  rather  not  to  be  combined ,  since 
the  Upani$ads  do  not  declare  this . 

Veddntin :  The  words  “rather  not”  set  aside  the  (above) 
opposite  view.  The  meditations  (based  on  Om  etc.)  have  not 
the  same  state  (of  co-existence)  as  their  bases  (B.  S.  III.  iii.  61). 

Why? 

Since  their  co-existence  is  not  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ads. 
For  there  is  no  Vedic  text  showing  the  co-existence  of  the  medi¬ 
tations,  unlike  what  is  shown  with  regard  to  the  accessories  of 
rites  and  hymns  etc.  enjoined  in  the  three  Vedas,  in  such  texts 
as,  “taking  up  the  vessel  or  holding  aloft  the  ladle,  the  priest 
chants  the  hymn,  utters  the  praise,  and  then  he  says,  ‘O  Prastota, 
you  sing  the  Sama  song,  O  Hota,  you  perform  this  sacrifice’  ”, 
and  so  on. 

Opponent :  Their  co-existence  is  gathered  from  the  statement 
about  the  application  itself. 

Vedantin  :  We  say,  no;  since  the  meditations  are  meant  to 


III.iii.66]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  757 

subserve  the  aspirant  (and  not  any  rite).  The  statement  about 
application  only  leads  to  a  correlation  among  the  Udgltha  etc. 
meant  for  a  sacrifice,  whereas  the  meditations  on  Udgltha  etc., 
though  connected  with  the  accessories  of  rites,  contribute  to 
the  aspirant’s  personal  purpose  like  the  milking  pot  etc.,  as  we 
said  under  the  aphorism  “inasmuch  as  a  separate  result  belongs 
to  meditations”  (III.  iii.  42).  This  is  precisely  the  distinction 
between  the  instruction  about  the  accessories  of  rites  and  the 
meditations  based  on  those  accessories,  that  the  former  are 
meant  for  making  their  contributions  to  rites,  whereas  the  latter 
are  for  subserving  the  aspirant’s  purposes  (by  purification  of  his 
mind).  The  two  indicatory  marks  (in  aphorisms  63  and  64) 
cannot  lead  to  a  co-existence  of  the  meditations,  since  no  Upa- 
ni$adic  text  or  logic  is  found  in  support.  It  cannot  be  that  since 
in  every  application  the  bases  of  the  meditations  are  taken  up 
together,  therefore  the  meditations  based  on  them  have  also  to 
be  known  as  meant  for  being  undertaken  in  combination,  for 
the  meditations  are  not  applied  to  those  rites.  Even  though  the 
meditations  be  determined  by  their  bases,  so  that  they  may  well 
cease  to  exist  when  the  bases  do  not  exist,  still  they  cannot  be 
combined  merely  because  the  bases  go  together.  This  is  so 
owing  to  the  very  reason  that  there  is  no  Vedic  declaration 
about  their  combination.  Hence  these  meditations  are  to  be 
undertaken  according  to  one’s  desire. 

\\\\\\ 

66.  And  (there  is  no  obligation  about  combination)  since  the 
Upani$ad  shows  ( contrariwise ). 

Moreover,  the  Upani$ad  shows  that  absence  of  co-existence 
among  the  meditations  in,  “The  (priest  called)  Brahma  who 
knows  thus  protects  the  sacrifice,  the  sacrificer,  and  all  the 
priests  from  all  sides”  (Ch.  IV.  xvii.  10).  If  all  the  meditations 
were  to  be  combined,  then  all  the  priests  would  have  known 
everything,  so  that  there  would  not  have  been  any  mention  of 
the  protection  of  all  by  (the  priest)  Brahma,  who  has  that 
knowledge.  Hence  the  meditations  can  be  undertaken  col¬ 
lectively  or  alternatively  just  as  the  aspirant  wants. 


Section  IV 


Topic  1:  Knowledge  not  a  Subsidiary  of  Rites 

SWfe  ^Klfefd  TOW;  ll?ll 

cjW-3T«r:  The  highest  human  goal  (i.e.  liberation)  a^r:  is  from 
this  (knowledge)  on  account  of  Vedic  declaration 

thus  (says)  qrreTTTC  Badarayaija. 

1.  Bddardyana  thinks  that  liberation  results  from  this  (know¬ 
ledge  of  the  Self),  (as  presented  in  the  Upanifads ),  because  the 
Vedic  texts  declare  so. 

Now  then,  the  question  is  whether  the  knowledge  of  the 
Self,  presented  by  the  Upanisads,  forms  a  part  of  rites  etc. 
through  the  medium  of  the  man  qualified  for  them,  or  it  leads 
independently  to  some  human  goal  (viz  liberation).  While 
engaging  himself  in  this  discussion,  the  aphorist  starts  with  the 
conclusion  itself  in  the  aphorism,  “Badarayaija  thinks”  etc.  The 
teacher  Badarayaija  thinks  that  liberation  results  independently 
“from  this”,  from  the  knowledge  of  the  Self,  as  imparted  by 
the  Upani§ads. 

How  is  this  known?  The  aphorist  says,  “because  the  Vedic 
texts  declare  so”.  Thus  the  following  Upani$adic  texts,  as  also 
others  of  this  class,  speak  of  knowledge  alone  as  the  cause  of 
liberation:  “The  knower  of  the  Self  crosses  over  sorrow”  (Ch. 
VII.  i.  3),  “He  who  knows  that  supreme  Brahman  becomes 
Brahman  Itself’  (Mu.  III.  ii.  9),  “The  knower  of  Brahman 
attains  the  Highest”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  “He  knows  who  has  a 
teacher.  For  him  the  delay  is  only  that  long  as  his  body  does 
not  fall;  then  he  merges  in  Brahman”  (Ch.  VI.  xiv.  2).  Starting 
with  “That  which  is  the  Self,  free  from  sins”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1), 
it  is  said,  “He  who  realizes  the  Self  after  comprehending  It 
from  his  teacher,  attains  all  the  worlds  and  all  the  desirable 
things”  (ibid.).  Again,  starting  with,  “The  Self,  my  dear,  is  to 


m.  iv.  2  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BH  A$YA  759 

be  realized”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  6),  it  is  said,  “This  much  is  (the  means 
of)  immortality”  (Bj*.  IV.  v.  15). 

Against  this  stands  up  another  (i.e.  an  opponent ): 

IRII 

(The  Self)  being  in  subservient  relation  (to  rites  etc.), 
(The  result  of  knowledge  is  merely)  a  glorification 
of  the  agent  (of  rites)  as  it  is  in  other  cases  5%  this 

is  how  Jaimini  (thinks). 

2.  laimini  thinks  that  since  the  Self  holds  a  subservient  posi¬ 
tion  in  rites  etc.,  the  mention  of  the  result  of  knowledge  is 
(merely)  in  glorification  of  the  agent,  as  is  the  case  elsewhere . 

Since  the  individual  Self  comes  into  subservient  relationship 
with  religious  acts  by  becoming  their  performer,  the  knowledge 
of  the  Self,  too,  must  form  a  part  of  the  rites  etc.  even  as  the 
purification  of  paddy  by  sprinkling  of  water  and  such  other 
acts  become  parts  of  the  rites  through  the  objects  they  are 
related  to.  Hence  the  mention  of  any  result  that  occurs  in  the 
Upani$ads  with  regard  to  this  knowledge,  whose  purpose  is 
ascertained  to  be  this,  must  be  by  way  of  eulogy.  This  is  what 
the  teacher  Jaimini  thinks.  This  is  like  the  Vedic  mention  of 
results  by  way  of  eulogy,  as  it  is  found  in  such  texts  as,  “He 
whose  sacrificial  ladle  is  made  of  Palasa  wood  does  not  hear 
any  evil”,  “When  a  sacrificer  applies  collyrium  to  his  own  eyes, 
he  covers  the  (evil)  eyes  of  his  enemy  thereby”,  “That  the 
(subsidiary  rites)  Prayaja,  Anuyaja,  etc.  are  performed,  thereby 
is  created  an  armour  for  the  sacrificer  and  the  (main)  sacrifice, 
so  that  the  enemy  of  the  sacrificer  may  be  defeated”,  and  so  on. 

Vedantin :  Since  this  knowledge  of  the  Self  is  not  spoken 
of  in  connection  with  some  other  topic  (e.g.  rites),  and  since 
for  that  very  reason,  nothing  like  context  etc.  is  in  evidence  to 
justify  its  application  to  any  rite,  how  can  it  be  included  in  a 
rite? 

Opponent :  On  the  strength  of  the  Vedic  text  about  the  result 
(e.g.  “The  knower  of  Brahman  transcends  grief”),  it  will  be 
included  in  a  rite  through  the  medium  of  the  agent  (like  the 


760  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iv.  2 

fact  of  being  made  of  Palasa  getting  connected  with  a  rite 
through  the  ladle,  on  the  strength  of  the  text). 

Vedantin :  This  cannot  be  so,  since  from  that  sentence  (about 
result)  it  does  not  logically  follow  that  this  knowledge  of  the 
Self  is  to  be  applied  to  a  rite.  For  things  that  have  not  been 
spoken  of  in  the  course  of  some  definite  topic  can  be  imagined 
to  be  applicable  to  some  rite  on  the  strength  of  some  sentence 
(stating  a  result),  only  if  some  invariable  medium  (like  a  ladle) 
is  in  evidence.  But  an  agent  is  a  variable  medium,  he  being  com¬ 
mon  to  both  ordinary  and  Vedic  acts.  Hence  the  knowledge  of 
the  Self  cannot  be  proved  to  be  connected  with  sacrifices 
through  the  medium  of  such  an  agent. 

Opponent :  Not  so,  since  the  knowledge  that  the  Self  is 
distinct  from  the  body  has  no  applicability  anywhere  else  but 
Vedic  rites;  for  the  knowledge  that  the  Self  is  different  from 
the  body  has  no  scope  in  ordinary  human  acts,  since  men  can 
engage  under  all  circumstances,  (i.e.  even  when  identifying  the 
body  with  the  Self),  in  acts  having  perceptible  (worldly)  results; 
but  they  cannot  engage  in  Vedic  duties,  yielding  their  results 
after  death,  unless  they  have  the  knowledge  that  the  Self  is 
different  from  the  body.  And  thus  the  knowledge  of  this  differ¬ 
ence  has  an  applicability  precisely  in  such  a  case. 

Vedantin :  The  Upani$adic  knowledge  of  the  Self  to  the  effect 
that  it  is  free  from  transmigration,  which  fact  becomes  obvious 
from  the  use  of  such  attributes  as  “free  from  sin”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii. 
1),  and  so  on,  cannot  be  subservient  to  any  impulsion  to  activity. 

Opponent :  Not  so,  since  the  instruction  is  about  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  transmigrating  Self  Itself,  as  is  suggested  through  the 
use  of  such  words  as  “ priya  (lovable)”1  (Bj*.  IV.  v.  6).  As  for 
the  attributes  like  “freedom  from  sin”  and  so  on,  they  must  be 
meant  for  eulogy. 

Objection :  Has  it  not  been  established  in  the  various  contexts 
that  the  transcendental  and  birthless  Brahman  is  the  origin  of 
the  world,  and  that  the  very  same  Brahman  is  taught  in  the 

1The  Brhadaranyaka  text  shows  that  the  Self  that  is  to  be  realized 
is  the  entity  for  whose  enjoyment  all  things  exist,  thereby  suggesting 
that  there  can  be  no  Self  which  is  not  an  experiencer  and  hence  subject 
to  transmigration. 


m.iv.4]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  761 

Upani$ads  as  constituting  the  real  nature  of  the  transmigrating 
soul? 

Vedantin :  True,  it  has  been  proved;  yet  for  re-affirming  this 
fact  the  process  of  objection  and  refutation,  which  centres 
round  a  discussion  of  the  result,  (as  to  whether  it  is  meant  for 
liberation  or  for  subserving  rites),  is  resorted  to  on  the  analogy 
of  driving  in  a  pile  (by  alternately  driving  it  down  and  pulling 
it  up  so  as  to  make  it  fixed  firmly  and  deeply  in  soft  ground). 

ll^ll 

Because  of  the  revelation  of  the  behaviour. 

3.  ( This  is  confirmed)  on  the  strength  of  what  is  revealed 
about  the  behaviour  (of  the  blowers  of  Brahman ). 

Opponent :  We  meet  with  the  Vedic  revelation  of  connection 
with  rites  even  for  the  knowers  of  Brahman  in  such  texts  as, 
“Janaka,  emperor  of  Videha,  performed  a  sacrifice  in  which 
gifts  were  freely  distributed”  (Bj*.  III.  i.  1),  “Sirs,  I  am  about 
to  perform  a  sacrifice”  (Ch.  V.  xi.  5),  which  occur  in  other 
contexts  (purporting  to  deal  with  the  knowledge  of  Brahman). 
And  this  is  in  line  with  the  behaviour  noticed  in  the  cases  of 
Uddalaka  and  others,  where  their  connection  with  a  house¬ 
holder’s  life  is  inferable  from  their  instruction  etc.  to  their 
sons.  If  liberation  can  be  achieved  through  knowledge  alone, 
why  should  they  have  undertaken  (the  householder’s)  duties 
involving  strenuous  effort,  for  proverbially  it  is  known,  “Why 
should  one  go  to  a  hill  if  one  has  honey  at  hand?” 

^->3^:  uvii 

Since  the  Upani$ad  declares  this. 

4.  (This  is  so)  because  the  Upani$ad  declares  this . 

In  the  text,  “That  rite  becomes  more  powerful  that  is  done 
along  with  meditation,  faith,  and  secret  knowledge”  (Ch.  I.  i. 
10),  knowledge  is  heard  of  as  forming  a  part  of  some  rite; 
hence  knowledge  by  itself  cannot  be  the  cause  of  liberation. 


762 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 

(nwRwigt  i  mi 


[III. iv.  5 


iq;  Because  of  following  together. 

5.  (This  is  so),  because  both  knowledge  and  work  follow  the 
Self  (when  it  transmigrates ). 

And  knowledge  cannot  be  independent,  since  in  the  text,  “It 
(i.e.  the  departing  soul)  is  followed  by  knowledge,  work,  (and 
past  experience)”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  2),  knowledge  and  work  are  seen 
to  act  in  association  in  producing  the  result. 

asst  fiWHiq  ll^ll 

6.  (And  this  is  so)  because  rites  are  enjoined  for  one  who  is 
possessed  of  that  (knowledge  of  the  Vedas). 

The  Upani$adic  texts  like  the  following  show  that  one  who  is 
possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  all  the  things  revealed  in  the  Vedas 
is  qualified  for  undertaking  rites:  “One  who  comes  back  from 
his  teacher’s  house  after  duly  reading  (i.e.  reciting)  the  Vedas, 
during  the  intervals  of  serving  him,  and  then  enters  the  house¬ 
holder’s  life  and  continues  the  study  of  the  Vedas  in  a  holy  place 
and  performs  other  prescribed  duties,  attains  the  world  of 
Brahman”  (Ch.  VIII.  xv.  1).  From  this  also  it  follows  that 
knowledge  cannot  produce  its  result  independently. 

Objection  :  In  this  sentence  we  find  mention  of  merely  the 
reading  (i.e.  reciting)  of  the  Vedas  in  the  phrase  “after  reading”, 
and  not  of  the  comprehension  of  the  meaning. 

Opponent :  That  is  no  defect,  since  the  conclusion  arrived  at 
(in  the  Purva-Mlrnamsa)  is  that  the  phrase  “reading  of  the 
Vedas”  includes  the  idea  of  comprehension  of  meaning  as  well, 
for  the  reading  has  a  perceptible  result  in  view.2 

■The  injunction,  “He  shall  pound  the  paddy”  has  in  view  the  making 
of  rice  by  removing  the  husk,  for  the  perceptible  result  sought  for  is  the 
making  of  cakes  (for  the  sacrifice)  with  the  rice.  So  also  the  perceptible 
result  of  reading  is  the  comprehension  of  meaning.  An  imperceptible 
result  comes  through  apurva — unseen  potential  result.  Thus  Brahman 
becomes  known  to  a  student  during  his  study  of  the  Vedas,  even  though 
he  becomes  a  householder  afterwards. 


m.  iv.  8]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  763 

$mm  m\ 

7.  And  (this  follows)  from  the  restrictive  texts . 

From  such  restrictive  injunctions  as  contained  in  the  texts, 
“By  doing  religious  acts,  indeed,  should  one  wish  to  live  here 
for  a  hundred  years.  For  a  man,  such  as  you  are  (who  wants 
to  live  thus),  there  is  no  way  other  than  this,  whereby  karma 
may  not  cling  to  you”  (Is.  2),  “That  which  is  known  as  the 
Agnihotra  is  a  sacrifice  that  has  to  be  followed  till  decrepitude 
and  death,  for  one  gets  released  from  it  either  through  decrepi¬ 
tude  or  death”,  it  follows  that  knowledge  is  a  subsidiary  of 
rites. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  position,  the  refutation  is  being 
stated: 

arfWlH&lfci  d^MI^  IFII 

g  But  because  of  being  taught  to  be  greater 

(the  view)  of  Badarayaija  stands  just  as  it  is 
f°r  so  it  is  revealed. 

8 .  But  Badarayantfs  view  stands  unshaken  because  of  the 
instruction  that  the  supreme  Self  is  even  greater  (than  the 
agent);  for  so  It  is  revealed  (by  the  Upani$ads). 

By  the  word  “but”  is  rebutted  the  opposite  view.  The  view 
held  out  that  “the  mention  of  the  result  of  knowledge  is  in 
glorification  of  the  agent”,  “since  the  Self  holds  a  subservient 
position  in  rites”  (B.  S.  III.  iv.  2),  is  not  proper. 

Why? 

On  account  of  something  even  greater  having  been  taught. 
Had  the  transmigrating  soul  alone,  inhabiting  the  body  as  the 
agent  and  experiencer,  been  taught  in  the  Upani§ads  as  some¬ 
thing  distinct  from  the  mere  body,  then  the  Upani$adic  mention 
of  result  could  have  been  a  eulogy  as  elaborated  by  the  oppo¬ 
nent.  But  over  and  above  (i.e.  greater  than)  the  embodied  soul, 
the  birthless  God,  free  from  such  mundane  attributes  as  agent- 
ship — the  supreme  Self,  possessed  of  such  attributes  as  freedom 
from  sin — is  taught  in  the  Upani$ads,  as  an  object  to  be  realized. 
And  His  knowledge  cannot  supply  any  impulsion  for  work,  on 


764  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [HI.  iv.  8 

the  contrary  it  uproots  all  works.  This  fact  will  be  stated  in  the 
aphorism,  “Knowledge  is  independent  of  rites,  since  it  uproots 
all  worldly  distinctions”  (III.  iv.  16).  Hence  the  opinion  of 
the  venerable  Badarayana,  as  expressed  in,  “Liberation  results 
from  this  knowledge  of  the  Self,  because  the  Vedic  texts  declare 
so”  (III.  iv.  1),  remains  just  as  it  is,  and  it  cannot  be  shaken  by 
the  fallacious  arguments  that  knowledge  is  a  subsidiary  of  rites, 
and  so  on.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Upani$ads  reveal  God,  the 
(supreme)  Self,  as  something  over  and  above  the  embodied  soul, 
in  such  texts  as,  “He  who  is  omniscient  in  general  and  all¬ 
knowing  in  detail”  (Mu.  I.  i.  9),  “Out  of  His  fear  the  wind 
blows,  out  of  fear  the  sun  rises”  (Tai.  II.  viii.  1),  “A  great  terror 
like  an  uplifted  thunder”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  2),  “Under  the  mighty  rule 
of  this  Immutable,  O  GargI”  (B{\  III.  viii.  9),  “That  deliberated, 
‘let  me  become  many,  let  me  be  born  diversely.’  That  created 
fire”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  3),  and  so  on. 

And  it  was  argued  that  the  transmigrating  soul  indicated  by 
such  terms  as  “lovable”  is  again  referred  to  as  the  object  to  be 
known,  in  such  texts  as,  “but  for  one’s  own  self,  all  is  loved. 
The  self,  my  dear,  should  be  realized”  (Bj\  IV.  v.  6);  “That 
which  breathes  through  Prana  is  your  Self  that  is  within  all” 
(Bf.  III.  iv.  1);  starting  with  “The  infinite  Being  that  is  seen 
in  the  eye”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  4),  and  ending  with,  “I  shall  explain 
this  very  Being  to  you  again”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  3);  and  so  on. 
But  this  reference  to  the  transmigrating  soul  cannot  be  meant 
for  absolute  difference  (between  the  individual  Self  and  God), 
in  the  face  of  the  texts  occurring  in  the  complementary  portions 
of  those  passages,  and  meant  for  imparting  instruction  about 
some  super-reality,  as  for  instance  the  texts,  “The  Rg-Veda, 
Yajur-Veda, . . .  are  the  breath  of  this  infinite  Being”  (Bj*.  II. 
iv.  10),  “That  which  transcends  hunger  and  thirst,  grief, 
delusion,  decay,  and  death”  (Bj\  III.  v.  1),  “Just  so  this  placid 
soul  rises  up  from  this  body  and*  unites  with  the  supreme  Light 
to  get  established  in  its  own  nature”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3).  It  is 
known  also  from  such  texts  as  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7), 
“There  is  no  other  witness  but  this”  (Bf.  III.  viii.  11),  etc.  that 
in  its  real  nature,  the  embodied  soul  is  but  God  Himself,  while 
its  state  of  embodiedness  is  a  creation  of  limiting  adjuncts.  All 


m.  iv.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  765 

this  was  elaborately  ascertained  by  us  earlier  in  the  appropriate 
contexts. 


g  But  the  Upani$adic  declaration  is  equally  in 

evidence. 

9.  But  the  Upani$adic  declaration  (of  conduct )  is  equally  in 
evidence  (proving  that  knowledge  is  not  subservient  to  religious 
acts). 

As  for  the  argument  that  from  the  Upani$adic  mention  of  the 
conduct  of  enlightened  men  it  follows  that  knowledge  is 
subservient  to  rites  (B.  S.  III.  iv.  3),  our  reply  is  this:  The 
Upani$adic  mention  of  the  conduct  of  enlightened  men  is 
equally  in  evidence  to  show  that  knowledge  is  not  subservient 
to  rites.  Thus  there  is  the  text,  “The  Kava$eya  seers,  who  had 
known  this  very  entity,  said,  Why  need  we  study  (the  Vedas), 
why  need  we  perform  sacrifices?’  This  is  that  very  entity, 
having  known  which,  the  enlightened  of  yore  ceased  to  perform 
the  Agnihotra  sacrifice”  (Kau.  II.  5),  “Knowing  this  very  Self 
the  Brahmagas  renounce  the  desires  for  sons,  for  wealth,  and 
for  worlds,  and  lead  a  mendicant  life”  (Bj\  III.  V.  1),  and  so 
on.  Moreover,  it  is  known  that  Yajnavalkya  and  others,  who 
had  realized  Brahman,  did  not  engage  in  rites,  from  such  texts 
as,  “  ‘This  much  indeed  is  immortality,  my  dear,’  saying  this 
Yajnavalkya  embraced  a  mendicant’s  life”  (Bj%  IV.  v.  15). 
Moreover,  the  indication  (about  the  combination  of  rites  and 
knowledge)  as  found  in  the  text,  “Venerable  sirs,  I  am  about  to 
perform  a  sacrifice”  (Ch.  V.  xi.  5),  relates  to  the  meditation 
on  Vaisvanara,  and  it  is  quite  possible  to  come  across  a  combina¬ 
tion  with  rites  in  the  domain  of  conceptions  regarding  the 
qualified  Brahman.  But  even  here,  there  can  be  no  possibility  of 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  becoming  subsidiary  to  religious  acts, 
for  nothing  like  context  etc.  is  discernible  here  (to  substantiate 
a  contrary  view).8 

8  The  enlightened  man  may  continue  performing  his  usual  acts  for 
setting  an  example  to  others.  But  his  is  no  ordinary  work,  as  he  lacks  the 
usual  ideas  of  “I  and  mine”. 


766  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  [III.  iv.  9 

As  for  the  argument  that  the  Upani$ads  declare  this  (B.  S. 
III.  iv.  4),  our  reply  is: 


srawfoft  u?o|i 

10.  The  declaration  is  not  universal . 

The  text,  “whatever  one  does  with  knowledge”  (Ch.  I.  i.  10), 
does  not  refer  to  all  kinds  of  knowledge,  it  being  confined  to 
the  relevant  meditation  that  forms  the  topic.  And  the  topic 
under  discussion  there  is  the  meditation  on  Udgltha  as  contained 
in,  “One  shall  meditate  on  the  letter  Om  as  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  1). 

And  it  was  said  (B.  S.  III.  iv.  5)  that  the  text,  “He  is  followed 
by  knowledge,  work,  (and  past  experience)”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  2), 
which  speaks  of  the  pursuit  (of  the  soul  by  knowledge  etc.), 
is  an  indication  of  the  subservience  of  knowledge.  That  is  being 
refuted: 


firm:  \\\\n 

(Knowledge  and  work)  are  to  be  divided  Bke 

a  hundred  (things). 

11.  Knowledge  and  action  are  to  be  divided  like  a  hundred 
things . 

A  division  is  to  be  noted  here  to  the  effect  that  knowledge 
follows  one,  and  work  another.  This  is  like  the  distribution  of  a 
hundred  (things).  For  instance,  when  somebody  says,  “Pay  a 
hundred  to  these  two”,  the  hundred  is  given  by  dividing  it  into 
two  moieties,  fifty  being  given  to  one  and  fifty  to  another. 
Similar  is  the  case  here.  Moreover,  this  text  about  “being  fol¬ 
lowed  by”  is  not  spoken  of  with  regard  to  one  who  would  have 
liberation,  since  the  conclusion  is  made  with  reference  to  a 
transmigrating  soul  in  the  sentence,  “Thus  does  the  man 
(transmigrate)  who  has  desires”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  6),  and  since  the 
man  hankering  for  liberation  is  treated  separately  in,  “But  then, 
as  for  the  man  who  does  not  desire”  (ibid.).  Now,  the  know¬ 
ledge  that  is  considered  in  that  text  (about  “being  followed  by 


III.  iv.  12] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


767 


knowledge  and  action” — Bj.  IV.  iv.  2),  relates  to  the  trans¬ 
migrating  soul  and  comprises  knowledges  of  both  kinds — 
enjoined  and  prohibited;  for  no  reason  for  distinction  exists. 
The  action  again  is  considered  irrespective  of  whether  it  be 
prescribed  or  prohibited,  the  text  having  taken  them  (knowledge 
and  action)  up  just  as  they  obtain  elsewhere.  From  this  point 
of  view  (that  they  relate  to  the  transmigrating  soul),  the  text 
about  “being  followed”  can  be  justified  even  without  resorting 
to  a  division. 

It  has  been  stated,  “Because  rites  are  enjoined  for  one  who 
is  possessed  of  the  knowledge  of  the  Vedas”  (B.  S.  III.  iv.  6); 
hence  comes  the  reply: 


For  him  who  has  merely  read  (i.e.  recited) 

the  Vedas. 

12.  (Engagement  in  religious  actions  is  prescribed)for  him 
only  who  has  merely  recited  the  Vedas . 

Since  we  hear  of  “reading”  alone  in  the  text,  “One  who 
comes  back  from  his  teacher’s  house  after  duly  reading  the 
Vedas”  etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  xv.  1),  we  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that 
the  prescription  for  rites  is  meant  for  one  who  has  merely  recited 
the  Vedas. 

Opponent :  In  that  case  a  man  may  not  have  the  necessary 
qualification  for  rites  owing  to  his  lack  of  knowledge. 

Vedantin :  That  defect  does  not  arise.  We  do  not  rule  out 
the  information  about  the  rites,  acquired  in  the  course  of  the 
recital,  that  endows  one  with  the  competence  for  rites.  What 
do  we  do  then?.  We  establish  this  fact  only  that  since  the 
knowledge  of  the  Self,  acquired  from  the  Upani$ads,  is  obviously 
possessed  of  its  own  independent  purpose,  it  cannot  become  a 
cause  for  generating  competence  for  rites.  And  this  is  to  be 
understood  in  the  same  way  as  when  a  man  qualified  for  a 
certain  rite  has  not  to  depend  on  the  knowledge  of  some  other 
rite. 


768  BRAHMA  -  SCrTRA  -  BHA$YA  [HI.iv.12 

Again,  it  was  stated,  “And  this  follows  from  the  restrictive 
texts”  (B.  S.  III.  iv.  7).  To  this  it  is  replied: 

llPttfalq. 

Not  so  because  of  the  absence  of  specification. 

13.  (The  restrictive  texts)  do  not  apply  (to  the  man  of 
knowledge),  since  the  restriction  is  made  without  any  specifica¬ 
tion. 

In  the  restrictive  texts  like,  “By  doing  karma ,  indeed,  should 
one  wish  to  live  here  for  a  hundred  years”  (Is.  2)  etc.  there  is 
no  specific  mention  that  these  apply  to  the  man  of  knowledge, 
since  the  restriction  is  made  in  a  general  way. 

II?YII 

*lOr  rather  ajyffa:  the  consent  (of  action)  is  for  the 
glorification  (of  knowledge). 

14.  Or  rather  the  consent  ( accorded )  for  doing  religious  acts 
is  meant  for  the  glorification  of  knowledge. 

With  regard  to  the  text,  “By  doing  karma  indeed”  etc.  another 
independent  interpretation  can  be  advanced  thus:  Even  if  on 
the  strength  of  the  context  this  sentence  is  construed  in  a  way 
to  connect  the  man  of  knowledge  with  “doing  karma”  (as  its 
agent),  still  it  is  to  be  understood  that  this  approval  of  doing 
work  is  accorded  only  by  way  of  eulogizing  knowledge;  for  it 
will  be  stated  later,  “ Karma  does  not  cling  to  you”.  The  idea 
implied  is  this:  “Even  though  a  man  of  knowledge  may  perform 
work  during  his  whole  life,  work  does  not  become  a  cause  of 
blemish,  owing  to  the  presence  of  his  knowledge”.  In  this  way 
knowledge  is  praised. 

\\\V\ 

^  And  some  (refrain  from  work)  according  to 

their  own  predilection. 


III.  iv.  17] 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA 


769 


15.  Moreover ,  some  refrain  from  (religious)  work  according 
to  personal  predilection. 

Moreover,  the  Vajasaneyins  have  a  text  according  to  which 
some  enlightened  men,  who  have  direct  experience  of  the  result 
of  knowledge,  take  their  stand  on  that  experience  and  declare 
out  of  personal  predilection  that  there  is  no  need  for  them  for 
begetting  children  and  such  other  acts  which  are  meant  for 
other  purposes.  That  text  runs  thus:  “This  is  the  reason  for  it: 
the  ancient  sages,  it  is  said,  did  not  desire  children  thinking, 
‘What  shall  we  achieve  through  children,  we  who  have  attained 
this  Self,  this  world  (i.e.  result)?’”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  22).  Further¬ 
more,  it  has  been  declared  by  us  more  than  once  that  unlike  the 
result  of  work  which  comes  to  fruition  after  some  time,  the 
result  of  knowledge  is  a  matter  of  direct  and  immediate  experi¬ 
ence.  For  this  reason  also,  knowledge  cannot  be  a  subsidiary 
of  rites,  nor  can  it  be  held  that  the  Upani$adic  mention  of  the 
result  of  knowledge  is  unreal  (i.e.  eulogistic). 

WR  ^  llftll 

16.  Moreover ,  (from  knowledge  comes)  the  destruction  (of 
the  whole  world). 

Moreover,  the  scriptures  declare  that  the  whole  world  of 
manifestation,  which  consists  of  actions,  instruments,  and  results, 
bestowing  the  necessary  qualification  for  work,  and  which  is  a 
creation  of  ignorance,  is  destroyed  root  and  branch  by  know¬ 
ledge,  as  stated  in,  “But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman  every¬ 
thing  has  become  the  Self,  then  what  should  one  smell  and 
through  what?”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  14),  and  so  on.  But  should  one  build 
his  hope  of  deriving  the  requisite  competence  for  rites  from 
the  knowledge  of  the  Self  as  taught  in  the  Upani$ads,  he  will 
be  left  only  with  a  destruction  of  all  rites.  From  this  also  it 
follows  that  knowledge  is  independent  of  rites. 

aasfong  ^  ^  %  ntwi 

=5T  And  357^3:3  (knowledge  belongs)  to  those  (monks) 
observing  continence  f|  for  51®^  (they  are  mentioned)  in  the 
Vedas. 


49 


770  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHASYA  [III.  iv.  17 

11.  And  knowledge  belongs  to  the  monks ,  for  they  are  met 
with  in  the  Vedas. 

Moreover,  knowledge  is  heard  of  in  connection  with  the  order 
of  life  (i.e.  Sannyasa,  monasticism)  in  which  continence  is 
observed.  And  knowledge  cannot  become  subsidiary  to  rites 
there,  since  (in  that  order)  rites  are  absent;  for  they  (the  monks) 
do  not  have  such  Vedic  rites  as  Agnihotra  etc.  It  may  be  argued 
that  there  is  no  such  stage  of  life  mentioned  in  the  Vedas  as 
that  of  the  continent  people.  But  that  argument  also  has  no 
basis;  for  they  are  mentioned  in  such  Vedic  texts  as,  “Virtue 
has  three  divisions.  (All  these  attain  the  virtuous  world,  while 
the  one  who  is  fully  occupied  with  Brahman  attains  immor¬ 
tality)”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1),  “And  those  who  follow  faith  (medi¬ 
tation),  austerities,  etc.  while  living  in  forests”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1), 
“Those  who  live  in  the  forest,  begging  for  alms,  viz  those 
(forest-dwellers  and  hermits)  who  resort  to  the  duties  of  their 
respective  stages  of  life  as  well  as  to  meditation”  (Mu.  I.  ii.  11), 
“Desiring  this  world  (i.e.  the  Self)  alone,  monks  renounce  their 
homes”  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  22),  “One  should  embrace  monasticism 
even  from  the  stage  of  Brahmacharya”  (Jabala,  4),  and  in  such 
other  texts,  where  monasticism  is  a  well-recognized  fact  in 
the  Upani$ads  and  Smrtis  in  the  case  of  those  people  who 
might  have  had  either  entered  or  not  entered  earlier  the  house¬ 
holder’s  life,  as  also  those  who  might  have  had  or  had  not  repaid 
their  debts  (to  gods,  manes,  and  seers).  For  this  reason  also 
knowledge  is  independent  of  rites. 

Topic  2:  Sannyasa  Prescribed  by  Scriptures 

TTTW  Sflwfa  %  ll^ll 

vsrfi rfr:  Jaimini  (thinks)  qrTW  (that  to  be  a  mere)  allusion 
(to  other  stages),  (it  is)  no  injunction,  tt  and  ffj 

because  (the  scripture)  3T7<rel%  condemns  (them). 

18.  Jaimini  thinks  that  to  be  an  allusion  to  other  stages  and 
no  injunction;  and  (this  is  so)  since  the  scripture  condemns  them. 


III.  iv.  18]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  771 

Opponent :  The  texts  starting  with,  “Virtue  has  three  divi¬ 
sions”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1),  that  were  quoted  (under  the  last 
aphorism)  to  prove  the  existence  of  people  belonging  to  an 
order  (of  monks)  observing  continence,  cannot  prove  that  fact, 
since  the  teacher  Jaimini  thinks  that  the  texts  are  reminiscent 
of  the  other  stages  of  life  (as  distinct  from  that  of  the  house¬ 
holders’),  and  they  impart  no  injunction. 

Why? 

Because  nothing,  such  as  a  verb  in  the  imperative  mood, 
occurs  here  to  indicate  an  injunction.  Moreover,  each  of  them 
is  noticed  to  imply  something  else.  In  the  text,  “Virtue  has  three 
divisions”  etc.  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1),  for  instance,  an  allusion  is  made 
to  the  stages  of  life  and  it  is  declared  that  their  results  are  not 
limitless  in  the  sentences,  “The  first  division  consists  of  sacrifice, 
study,  and  offer  of  wealth;  the  second  division  of  austerity;  and 
the  third  of  the  Brahmacdrin  living  in  his  teacher’s  house  for 
life  and  laying  down  his  body  there”  (ibid.).  Then  the  contin¬ 
uance  in  Brahman  is  praised  as  yielding  an  infinite  result  in  the 
sentence,  “All  these  attain  the  virtuous  worlds;  but  he  who  is 
steadfast  in  Brahman  (that  is,  meditates  steadfastly  on  Brahman 
with  the  help  of  Om)  gets  immortality”  (ibid.). 

Objection :  Even  though  this  be  a  mere  allusion,  still  as  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  stages  of  life  become  known  from  it. 

Opponent :  True,  they  become  known;  but  their  recognition 
is  derived  from  the  Smftis  and  common  usage  and  not  from 
the  Upani$ads.  Hence  in  a  case  of  conflict  with  direct  Vedic 
texts,  they  are  to  be  disregarded  or  accepted  as  referring  to 
people  who  are  debarred  from  rites  (e.g.  the  blind,  lame,  etc.). 

Objection :  Is  not  the  householder’s  life  also  mentioned  along 
with  the  continent  in,  “The  first  division  consists  of  sacrifice, 
study,  and  offer  of  wealth”?  (So  the  whole  passage  must  be 
equally  authoritative.) 

Opponent:  Quite  so.  Still  from  the  fact  that  the  rites  like 
Agnihotra  etc.  are  prescribed  for  the  householder  alone,  that 
stage  of  life  exists  as  a  thing  well  recognized  by  the  Vedas. 
Hence  this  allusion  to  other  stages  is  merely  by  way  of  eulogy 
(of  steadfastness  in  Brahman),  and  not  by  way  of  an  injunction. 
Moreover,  the  direct  Vedic  texts  denounce  any  other  stage  of 


772  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA$YA  [III.  iv.  18 

life:  “One  who  gives  up  the  fire  is  a  destroyer  of  the  valour 
(i.e.  a  murderer)  of  the  gods”,  “Having  offered  the  desirable 
wealth  to  the  teacher,  do  not  cut  off  the  line  of  progeny”  (Tai. 
I.  xi.  1),  “A  man  without  a  son  has  no  world  in  future.  All 
creatures  are  aware  of  this”,  and  so  on.  Thus  the  texts,  “Those 
who  undertake  faith  (meditation),  austerities,  etc.  while  living 
in  forest”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1 ) ,  “Those  who  live  in  the  forest . . . ,  who 
resort  to  the  duties  of  their  own  stages  of  life  as  well  as  to 
meditation”  (Mu.  I.  ii.  11),  impart  instruction  about  the  “path 
of  the  gods”  and  not  about  other  stages  of  life.  Moreover,  it  is 
doubtful  if  the  other  stages  of  life  are  prescribed  in  the  texts, 
“The  second  division  is  austerity”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1)  etc.  Similarly 
the  text,  “Desiring  this  world  (i.e.  the  Self)  alone,  monks 
renounce  their  homes”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  22),  is  not  an  injunction  for 
monasticism,  it  being  only  a  eulogy  of  the  world  (of  the  Self). 

Objection :  Have  not  the  Jabalas  a  direct  and  clear  injunction 
about  renunciation  in  the  text,  “One  should  enter  into  monas¬ 
ticism  even  from  the  stage  of  Brahmacarya ”? 

Veddntin :  Quite  so;  but  it  is  to  be  noted  that  the  present 
discussion  is  carried  on  by  ignoring  this  text. 

3RWT  4K<|qir:  HUH 

*K<iqQU  Badarayaija  (thinks)  (that  other  stages  also  are  to  be) 
spgG&f  observed  Vedic  texts  being  equally  extant. 

19.  Badardyana  thinks  that  the  other  orders  of  life  are  also  to 
be  observed ,  since  Vedic  texts  speak  equally  of  all  the  stages 
of  life. 

The  teacher  Badarayaga  is  of  the  opinion  that  the  other  stages 
of  life  are  to  be  resorted  to  on  account  of  their  reference  in 
the  Vedas.  Since  on  account  of  the  obligatoriness  of  the  per¬ 
formance  of  Agnihotra  etc.,  a  conflict  with  monasticism  arises, 
and  it  is  concluded  (by  the  opponent)  that  this  other  stage  of 
life  is  to  be  resorted  to  by  those  (blind,  lame,  and  others)  who 
are  debarred  from  Agnihotra  etc.,  therefore  Badarayaoa  refutes 
this  view  under  the  belief  that  one  has  to  admit  willynilly  the 
other  stages  of  life  just  as  much  as  the  householder’s. 


III.  iv.  19] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


773 


Why? 

Since  the  texts  speak  equally  of  all  the  stages;  for  the  text, 
“Virtue  has  three  divisions”  etc.  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1),  is  seen  to 
allude  to  the  other  stages  of  life  equally  with  the  householder’s. 
It  is  to  be  noted  that  just  as  the  householder’s  life,  prescribed  by 
other  Vedic  texts,  is  alluded  to  here,  so  also  are  the  other  stages 
of  life.  And  this  is  as  in  the  case  of  the  Nivita  and  Pr&cindvita 
which  though  prescribed  in  a  separate  injunction  are  yet 
understood  to  be  referred  to  along  with  Upavita .4  Hence  the 
pursuit  of  the  other  stages  of  life  is  as  valid  as  the  pursuit 
of  the  householder’s  life.  Similarly  in  the  text,  “Desiring  this 
world  (i.e.  the  Self)  alone  the  monks  renounce  home”  (Bf.  IV. 
iv.  22),  renunciation  is  mentioned  along  with  the  study  of  the 
Vedas  etc.;  and  in  “Those  who  undertake  faith  (meditation), 
austerities,  etc.  while  living  in  forests”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1),  the  stage 
of  living  in  forest  is  read  along  with  the  meditation  on  the  five 
fires  (so  that  they  are  equally  enjoined). 

It  was  also  stated  that  it  is  a  matter  of  doubt  whether  any 
other  stage  of  life  is  enjoined  in  the  passage;  “The  second  divi¬ 
sion  is  austerity”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1)  etc.;  that  too  is  nothing 
damaging,  since  a  reason  for  a  definite  conclusion  is  in  evidence. 
For  in  the  text,  “Virtue  has  three  divisions”  (ibid.),  an  assertion 
is  made  about  the  threefold  division.  Moreover,  the  multifarious 
virtuous  deeds  like  sacrifices,  which  have  diverse  (injunctions 
of)  origin,  cannot  be  included  under  the  three  divisions,  unless 
it  be  through  their  association  with  the  stages  of  life.  Of  these, 
one  division  of  virtue  is  the  householder’s  life  indicated  by 
“sacrifices”  etc.  In  the  word  “ Brahmacdrin ”  we  find  a  clear 
reference  to  an  order  of  life.  And  by  the  word  “austerity” 
what  division  of  virtue  can  be  accepted  other  than  that  order 

4  The  sacred  thread  held  round  the  neck  like  a  garland  is  called  Nivita\ 
■when  held  from  the  right  shoulder,  across  the  chest  and  passing  under 
the  left  arm,  it  is  Pracinavita\  the  opposite  position  from  the  left  shoulder 
to  the  right  gives  the  Upavita.  The  sentence,  “Nivita  is  meant  for  rites 
performed  for  men  (i.e.  guests),  Pracinavita  for  rites  for  the  manes; 
for  rites  for  the  gods  the  Upavita  is  used”,  is  interpreted  to  mean  that 
the  injunction  here  is  only  about  the  Upavita ,  the  use  of  the  other  two 
being  known  otherwise.  These  known  uses  are  referred  to  here  for 
eulogizing  the  Upavita . 


774  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.  iv.  19 

of  life  (of  the  Vanaprastha)  in  which  austerity  preponderates? 
On  the  strength  of  the  indicatory  word  “forest”  occurring  in, 
“those  who  undertake  faith  and  austerity,  etc.  while  living  in 
forests”  (Ch.  V.  x.  1),  an  order  of  life  is  necessarily  to  be 
understood  as  meant  by  the  words  “faith”  and  “austerity”. 
Hence  though  the  stages  of  life  occur  by  way  of  allusion  only* 
they  are  still  to  be  resorted  to. 

faM  %IK«W5  IRo|| 

qnr  Or  rather  fafe:  an  injunction  holding  (the 

sacrificial  fuel). 

20.  Or  rather  it  is  an  injunction  as  in  the  case  of  holding  the 
sacrificial  fuel. 

Or  rather  it  is  an  injunction  about  the  other  orders  of  life, 
and  not  a  mere  allusion. 

Opponent :  If  an  injunction  be  accepted  here,  the  compre¬ 
hension  of  a  unity  of  idea  (of  the  passage)  will  be  debarred.  As 
a  matter  of  fact,  however,  a  unity  of  idea  is  obvious,  viz  that 
the  three  divisions  of  virtue  lead  to  virtuous  worlds  while  the 
steadfastness  in  Brahman  yields  immortality. 

Veddntin :  This  is  true;  and  yet  the  apparent  unity  of  idea  has 
to  be  rejected  and  injunction  accepted  on  account  of  the 
uniqueness  of  the  fact  (not  heard  of  before)  and  the  absence 
of  any  other  injunction.  And  in  the  face  of  a  clear  comprehen¬ 
sion  of  other  stages  of  life,  there  is  no  need  to  take  shelter  under 
a  unity  of  idea  by  supposing  the  text  to  involve  an  attributive 
corroboration  (or  a  glorifying  eulogy),5  “As  in  the  case  of  the 
holding  of  the  sacrificial  fuel”.  In  the  text,  “He  shall  approach 

*Gunavada ,  as  in,  “The  sun  is  the  sacrifical  stake”,  which  glorifies  the 
stake  by  saying  that  it  shines  like  the  sun.  The  opponent  interprets  the 
Chandogya  passage  under  discussion .  to  mean,  “Steadfastness  in  Brahman, 
yielding  infinite  result,  is  eulogized  by  decrying  the  other  orders  of  life 
as  yielding  limited  results”.  Thus  the  passage  has,  according  to  him  a 
unity  of  idea.  An  Anuvada  restates  a  known  fact,  as  in,  “Fire  is  the 
remedy  for  cold”.  A  Bbutdrthavada  states  something  which  neither 
contradicts  nor  confirms  a  known  fact,  as  in  “Indra  holds  a  thunder  in 
hand”.  Contradiction  leads  to  Gunavada,  and  confirmation  to  Anuvada. 


III.  iv.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  775 

(the  sacrificial  altar)  by  holding  the  fuel  below  (the  vessel  of 
oblation);  for  in  a  case  of  sacrifice  to  the  gods,  the  fuel  is  held 
above”,  even  though  the  fact  of  holding  above  appears  to 
constitute  a  single  idea  along  with  the  fact  of  holding  below, 
still  an  injunction  is  admitted  about  holding  above,  since  it 
relates  to  a  unique  fact.  Thus  it  is  that  in  the  course  of  deter¬ 
mining  the  subsidiaries  (in  the  Purva-Mlmamsa)  it  is  said,  “But 
there  is  an  injunction  in  the  matter  of  holding  above,  since  the 
fact  is  unique”0  (Jai.  Su.  III.  iv.  1$).  Similarly,  it  is  inferred 
that  the  text  alluding  to  the  orders  of  life  is  in  fact  an  injunction. 
Even  if  this  be  a  mere  allusion  to  the  other  orders  of  life,  still 
on  the  strength  of  the  eulogy  (implied  in,  “All  these  attain  the 
virtuous  worlds,  the  man  steadfast  in  Brahman  attains  immortal¬ 
ity)”,  an  injunction  about  “steadfastness  in  Brahman”  has  to  be 
admitted.  And  then  it  has  to  be  considered  as  to  whether  that 
steadfastness  is  meant  for  anyone  belonging  to  any  one  of  the 
four  stages  of  life  or  for  the  monk  alone.  Now,  if  by  the  men¬ 
tion  of  the  stages  of  life  down  to  Brahmacctrya  (in  “Virtue  has 
three  divisions”  etc.),  the  monk  too  becomes  alluded  to,  then  it 
may  as  well  follow  that  anyone  belonging  to  the  four  stages  of 
life  can  be  steadfast  in  Brahman,  since  all  the  four  stages  are 
mentioned  equally  and  nobody  can  logically  be  outside  the  four. 
If,  however,  the  monk  is  not  alluded  to,  then  the  conclusion  will 
be  that  the  monk  alone  can  be  “steadfast  in  Brahman”,  he  alone 
having  been  left  out  of  the  enumeration. 

Some  think  that  the  monk  also  is  alluded  to  in  that  text  by 
the  term  “austerity”,  implying  thereby  the  Vaikhdnasas  (one  of 
the  four  classes  of  forest-dwelling  Vdnaprasthas ).  But  that  is 
improper;  for  when  there  is  a  way  out,  it  is  not  proper  to 
understand  the  monk  from  an  attributive  word  signifying  the 
Vanaprastha .  It  is  but  proper  that  just  as  the  Brabmacctrin  and 
the  householder  are  presented  here  through  their  respective 

•When  the  ghee  placed  in  the  sruk  is  carried  to  the  Ahavanlya  fire  in  a 
Mahapitjr-sacrifice  or  a  Pretagnihotra,  then  this  injunction  is  to  be 
followed,  “One  shall  approach  by  holding  the  fuel”  below  that  ghee.  Hence 
the  text  about  holding  the  fuel  above  may  be  taken  as  a  mere  eulogy 
of  this  holding  below.  But  in  fact  a  fresh  injunction  is  admitted  about 
holding  above,  by  breaking  the  unity  of  the  sentence. 


776  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iv.  20 

distinctive  attributes,  so  also  are  the  monk  and  the  Vanaprastha. 
And  austerity  is  a  distinct  feature  of  the  order  of  V maprasthas , 
since  the  word  austerity  comes  to  be  applied  to  it  by  usage 
owing  to  the  predominance  of  the  mortification  of  the  body 
among  them.  But  the  monks’  attributes  consisting  of  control  of 
senses  etc.  are  not  surely  referred  to  by  the  term  austerity.  And 
it  is  improper  that  the  stages  of  life,  well  known  to  be  four  in 
number,  should  be  referred  to  as  three.  Moreover,  it  is  noticed 
that  they  are  mentioned  separately  thus:  “These  three  become 
fit  for  the  virtuous  worlds,  whereas  the  other  one  becomes  fit 
for  immortality”.  This  reference  in  a  separate  way  is  justifiable 
only  if  there  is  a  difference.  For  it  cannot  be  asserted  that 
Devadatta  and  Yajnadatta  are  dull  of  intellect,  while  one  of 
them  has  a  bright  intellect;  but  it  can  well  be  said  that  Devadatta 
and  Yajnadatta  are  both  dull  of  intellect,  while  Visflumitra  has  a 
bright  intellect.  Hence  it  is  the  people  in  the  earlier  three  stages 
of  life  that  achieve  the  virtuous  worlds,  while  the  remaining 
one,  viz  the  monk,  attains  immortality. 

Opponent :  How  can  the  term  “steadfast  in  Brahman”,  used 
in  its  derivative  sense  and  possible  of  application  to  people  in 
all  the  stages  of  life,  be  confined  to  the  monk  alone?  Or  should 
you  argue  that  the  term  is  used  in  its  conventional  sense  to 
imply  a  monk,  then  the  conclusion  will  be  that  immortality  is 
attained  by  the  mere  fact  of  belonging  to  a  certain  order  of 
life  (viz  monasticism),  so  that  knowledge  will  become  useless. 

The  ( Vedantin's )  reply  here  is  being  given:  The  term  “stead¬ 
fastness  in  Brahman”  implies  a  consummation  in  Brahman,  a 
total  absorption  in  Brahman,  which  is  the  same  as  the  absence 
of  any  other  preoccupation  except  that.  And  that  is  not  possible 
for  people  in  the  other  three  stages,  since  the  Vedas  mention 
that  one  incurs  sin  by  giving  up  the  duties  of  one’s  own  stage 
of  life.  But  the  monk  can  incur  no  sin  of  non-performance  of 
duties  owing  to  his  renunciation  of  all  duties.  But  virtues 
like  control  of  senses  and  organs,  which  characterize  him,  merely 
strengthen  his  steadfastness  in  Brahman,  but  do  not  oppose  it. 
The  duty  for  his  order  of  life  consists  of  steadfastness  itself  in 
Brahman,  supported  by  self-control  etc.,  whereas  sacrifices  etc. 
are  the  duties  for  others;  the  monk  incurs  sin  by  transgressing 


III.  iv.  20]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  777 

his  own  duties,  (as  much  as  others  do  by  transgressing  theirs). 
In  support  of  this  occur  these  texts:  “Monasticism  is  Brahma 
(Hiranyagarbha),  because  Brahma  is  the  highest  (being),  and 
the  highest  Entity  has  become  Brahma.  These  other  austerities 
are  surely  inferior;  monasticism  indeed  transcended  them”7 
(Narayaija,  78);  “Those  to  whom  the  entity  presented  by  the 
Vedantic  knowledge  has  become  fully  ascertained,  and  who 
endeavour  assiduously  with  the  help  of  the  Yoga  of  monasticism 
(become  free)”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  6),  and  others.  And  the  Smrti 
texts  like,  “Those  who  have  their  intellect  absorbed  in  that, 
whose  life  is  that,  whose  Self  is  that,  whose  steadfastness  is  in 
that,  whose  consummation  is  in  that  (attain  liberation)”  (Gita, 
V.  17),  show  that  a  man  who  is  steadfast  in  Brahman  has  no 
duty.  Hence  the  criticism  has  no  scope  that  since  the  monk  gets 
immortality  from  the  mere  fact  of  his  belonging  to  an  order 
of  life,  knowledge  becomes  useless.  Thus  it  is  that  even  though 
the  other  orders  of  life  be  merely  alluded  to  (in  the  text  “Virtue 
has  three  divisions”  etc. — (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1),  we  do  gather  from 
it  monasticism  as  well  consisting  of  steadfastness  in  Brahman. 

The  teacher  introduced  this  discussion  without  taking  into 
consideration  the  text  of  the  Jabala  Upani§ad  which  enjoins  the 
other  order  of  life  (viz  monasticism).  But  as  a  matter  of  fact, 
direct  texts  do  occur  which  prescribe  the  other  order  of  life, 
'“Having  finished  the  life  of  the  Brahmiacarin  (i.e.  bachelor 
student  of  the  Vedas)  one  shall  become  a  householder;  after 
becoming  a  householder  one  shall  retire  to  the  forest;  after 
retiring  to  the  forest  one  shall  become  a  monk.  Should  it, 
however,  happen  otherwise  (that  is,  should  dispassion  become 
ripe),  one  shall  become  a  monk  from  the  stage  of  Brahmacarya, 
or  from  that  of  the  householder,  or  from  that  of  the  forest- 
dweller”  (Ja.  4).  Moreover,  it  cannot  be  argued  that  this 
Upani$adic  text  refers  to  those  who  are  debarred  from  Vedic 
rites,  because  the  text  speaks  in  a  general  way  so  it  cannot 
be  restricted  to  a  certain  category,  and  because  a  separate 
prescription  is  made  for  the  unqualified  in  the  text,  “Again  (one 

7  Monasticism  being  equated  with  the  Highest,  must  itself  be  the  highest;* 
and  this  monasticism  consists  in  remaining  steadfast  in  Brahman,  the 
meaning  of  Om,  by  giving  up  all  other  activities. 


778  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iv.  2D 

shall  renounce)  even  if  one  has  undertaken  a  vow  or  not,  one 
who  continues  or  does  not  continue  to  serve  his  teacher  even 
after  the  completion  of  his  study,  one  who  has  given  up  the 
fire  after  being  a  widower,  or  one  who  has  not  lighted  the  fire  at 
all”  (ibid.).  Moreover,  monasticism  is  meant  as  a  subsidiary  of 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman  for  its  full  maturity;  and  this  is 
shown  in  the  text,  “Then  the  monk  who  adopts  a  discoloured 
robe,  shaves  his  head,  desists  from  accepting  wealth,  becomes 
pure,  and  free  frorti  enmity,  resorts  to  begging,  becomes  fit  to 
attain  the  state  of  Brahman”  (Ja.  5).  Hence  is  proved  the 
existence  of  the  stages  of  life  for  the  continent,  and  hence  also 
is  proved  the  independence  of  knowledge,  it  having  been 
enjoined  for  the  continent. 

Topic  3:  Injunctions  for  Meditation  not  Eulogistic 

iR$u 

Mere  praise  3qf3HT<t  because  of  having  been 
accepted  (as  subsidiaries  of  ritual  acts)  ^  if  this  be  the 
contention  cf  not  so,  because  of  extraordinariness. 

21.  If  it  be  contended  that  texts  (about  Udgitha  etc.)  are 
merely  eulogistic ,  because  of  having  been  accepted  as  subservient 
to  ritual  acts ,  then  not  so,  because  of  the  extraordinariness  (of 
the  texts). 

Doubt :  With  regard  to  the  texts,  “That  Om,  called  Udgitha, 
is  the  essence  of  all  essences;  it  is  the  highest;  it  is  the  symbol 
for  the  highest,  and  the  eighth  in  number”  (Ch.  I.  i.  3),  “This 
(viz  the  earth)  is  Rk,  and  fire  is  Sama”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  1),  “This 
fire  that  is  lighted  up  is  but  this  world”,  “This  very  Uktha 
(collection  of  hymns)  is  this  earth  to  be  sure”,  the  doubt 
arises:  Are  these  Vedic  texts  meant  for  the  eulogy  of  Udgitha 
etc.,  or  are  they  for  prescribing  meditation? 

Opponent :  When  under  such  a  doubt,  the  reasonable  position 
is  that  they  are  meant  for  eulogy,  since  the  texts  are  accepted 
as  referring  to  Udgitha  etc.  that  are  subsidiaries  of  rites;  and 
these  are  on  a  par  with  such  sentences  as,  “This  earth  itself  is 


III.  iv.  22  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTR A  -  BH A§YA  779 

the  sacrificial  ladle  (Juhu)”,  “the  sun  is  a  tortoise  (the  form  of 
the  altar)”,  “Heaven  is  the  Ahavanlya  fire”,  and  so  on,  where 
they  are  meant  for  eulogizing  the  Juhu  etc. 

Vedantin :  The  teacher  says  that  it  is  not  reasonable  that  the 
purpose  of  these  texts  should  be  merely  praise  because  of  the 
extraordinariness  (of  their  content).  And  this  extraordinariness 
remains  intact  only  if  these  sentences  are  injunctive,  whereas 
they  become  useless  if  they  are  eulogistic.  For  it  has  been  said  in 
the  aphorism,  “But  since  they  are  in  syntactical  unity  with  an 
injunction,  they  must  be  meant  for  the  eulogy  of  the  injunction” 
(Jai.  Su.  I.  ii.  7),  that  a  eulogy  derives  its  applicability  by 
becoming  an  appendage  to  a  text  imparting  an  injunction.  As  a 
result,  this  eulogy  of  the  Udgltha  etc.,  (as  contained  in  the  texts 
cited),  that  occurs  in  a  different  context  (i.e.  in  the  Upani$ads) 
will  become  useless  since  it  cannot  be  tagged  on  to  the  Udgltha 
etc.  mentioned  in  a  different  context  (in  the  Karma-kanda) .  But 
the  text,  “This  earth  itself  is  a  JuhiC\  occurs  in  the  very  proxim¬ 
ity  of  an  injunction.  So  there  is  a  difference  between  the 
present  passage  and  that  illustration.  Hence  the  Upani$adic  texts 
like  the  above  are  meant  only  as  injunctions  (of  meditation). 

ll^ll 

22.  Moreover,  (these  must  be  injunctions)  on  account  of  the 
occurrence  of  words  having  an  injunctional  meaning. 

Moreover,  words  of  injunction  occur  clearly  in  such  texts  ast 
“One  should  meditate  on  the  Udgltha”  (Ch.  I.  i.  1),  “One  should 
meditate  on  Sama”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  1),  “One  should  think  of  oneself 
as  ‘I  am  Uktha’  (Tai.  A.  II.  i.  2)”.  These  will  be  set  at  naught  if 
their  only  purpose  be  eulogy.  Thus  also  runs  a  Smj-ti  text  of 
those  who  are  adepts  in  reasoning;  “In  all  the  Vedas  these 
(verbal  moods)  are  the  invariable  signs  of  injunction,  viz 
‘should  do’,  ‘should  be  done’,  ‘must  be  done’,  ‘may  become’, 
‘should  be’  They  make  this  statement  under  the  belief  that 
the  verbal  endings  like  the  lift  etc.  express  injunction.  Besides, 
under  every  topic  a  result  is  mentioned  (in  the  Upani$ads), 
such  as,  “He  becomes  certainly  a  fulfiller  of  desires”  (Ch.  I.  i  7), 
“For  he  is  able  to  fulfil  desires  by  singing  the  Sama  song”  (Ch. 


780  BRAHMA  -  SCrTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iv.  22 

I.  vii.  9),  “All  the  worlds  above  and  below  become  available 
for  his  enjoyment”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  3),  and  so  on.  From  this  also  it 
follows  that  the  texts  about  the  Udgitha  etc.  are  meant  for 
enjoining  meditation. 

Topic  4:  Upanisadic  Stories 

IR^II 

Meant  for  Pariplava  ^  if  this  be  the  conten¬ 
tion,  ^  not  so  on  account  of  having  been  specified. 

23 .  If  it  be  argued  that  they  (the  Upanisadic  stories )  are 
meant  for  the  (ritualistic  application  called)  Pariplava ,8  (we 
say )  that  this  is  not  so,  on  account  of  the  stories  for  the  Pariplava 
having  been  specified . 

Doubt :  There  occur  some  stories  in  the  Upani$ads  as 
recounted  in  such  texts  as  the  following:  “Now  Yajnvalkya  had 
two  wives  Maitreyl  and  KatyayanI”  (Bj*.  IV.  v.  1),  “Pratardana, 
son  of  Divodasa,  went  to  the  beloved  place  of  Indra”  (Kau.  III. 
1),  “JanaSruti,  the  great  grandson  of  Janasruti,  used  to  distrib¬ 
ute  gifts  with  reverence;  he  gave  plentifully;  he  (had  food) 
cooked  for  many  people”  (Ch.  IV.  i.  1).  With  regard  to  these 
the  doubt  arises:  Are  these  stories  meant  for  use  as  a  ritualistic 
act  called  Pariplava,  or  are  they  for  the  easy  comprehension  of 
the  knowledge  imparted  along  with  them? 

Opponent :  These  Upani$adic  stories  are  meant  for  Pariplava, 
for  they  are  on  a  par  with  other  stories,  and  stories  are  pre¬ 
scribed  for  use  in  Pariplava.  From  this  it  would  follow  that  the 
Upani$ads  do  not  have  knowledge  as  their  main  purport,  they 
being  meant  for  application  in  rites  just  as  much  as  the  mantras . 

Veddntin  :  Not  so. 

Why? 

8  There  is  an  injuncuon  that  in  the  course  of  the  horse-sacrifice,  the 
priests  should  tell  stories  to  the  sacrificing  king  and  his  family  and 
councillors.  On  the  first  day  is  to  be  related  the  story  of  Vaivasvata 
Manu,  on  the  second  of  Vaivasvata  Yama,  and  on  the  third  of  Varuna 
and  Surya. 


III.  iv.  24]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  781 

Because  certain  stories  are  specified  for  that  (ritualistic) 
purpose.  Thus  it  is  that  the  topic  is  raised  with  the  sentence, 
“The  priests  shall  relate  the  stories”;  and  then  only  a  certain 
number  of  stories,  counting  from  the  one  beginning  with, 
“Manu,  a  descendant  of  Vivasvan”  etc.  are  specified.  Were  it 
the  case  that  all  the  stories  are  to  be  used,  just  because  they  are 
stories,  this  specification  would  have  been  useless.  Hence  these 
Upani$adic  stories  are  not  meant  for  Pariplava. 

irvii 

^  And  because  of  becoming  joined  through 

unity  of  idea  in  that  way. 

24 .  And  because  (the  stories)  become  connected  (with  medi¬ 
tations)  through  unity  of  idea  in  that  way,  (therefore  they  are 
meant  for  illuminating  the  proximate  knowledge ). 

Moreover,  if  the  stories  are  not  meant  for  use  in  Pariplava, 
it  is  but  natural  that  they  should  be  meant  for  illuminating  the 
proximate  knowledge  (meditation),  for  they  are  joined  to  them 
by  way  of  unity  of  idea.  Thus  it  is  that  in  the  respective  con¬ 
texts  they  are  noticed  to  be  connected  with  the  proximate 
meditations  through  unity  of  ideas,  by  virtue  of  the  interest 
they  create  in  the  meditations  (or  knowledge)  and  the  ease  of 
comprehension  that  they  supply.  For  instance,  in  the  Mattreyi 
Brdhmand  (of  the  Brhadaragyaka  Upani$ad)  the  story  of 
Yajnavalkya,  Maitreyl,  and  KatyayanI  is  seen  to  have  a  unity 
of  idea  with  the  knowledge  contained  in  the  text,  “The  Self, 
mv  dear  Maitreyl,  is  to  be  realized”  etc.  (Br.  IV.  v.  6);  in  the 
story  of  Pratardana  also,  the  unity  of  idea  with  the  knowledge 
imparted  in,  “I  am  Prana,  the  Self  that  is  consciousness”  etc. 
(Kau.  III.  2),  is  obvious;  and  the  story  starting  with,  “The 
great  grandson  of  Janasruti”,  is  connected  with  the  knowledge 
imparted  in  the  text,  “Air  indeed  is  the  place  of  merger”  etc. 
(Ch.  IV.  iii.  1).  Just  as  the  stories  occurring  in  the  ritualistic 
portion  of  the  Vedas,  for  instance,  “He  plucked  out  his  own 
marrow  (or  omentum)”  etc.,  are  meant  for  emphasizing  the 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


782 


[III.  iv.  24 


proximate  injunctions,  so  also  is  the  case  here.  Hence  they  are 
not  meant  for  Pariplava. 


Topic  5:  Sannyasins  Free  from  Rituals 


IRXII 

3RT:  cr3[  ^  For  that  very  reason  again 
there  is  no  need  of  “lighting  fire”  and  so  on. 

25.  For  that  very  reason  again ,  (the  Sannydsin  has )  no  need 
of  “lighting  fire”,  and  such  other  rites. 

Since  the  aphorism,  “Badarayana  thinks  that  liberation  results 
from  this  (knowledge),  because  the  Vedic  texts  declare  so” 
(III.  iv.  1),  is  applicable  in  this  context  as  well,  though  it  is  far 
removed,  therefore,  it  is  being  alluded  to  in  this  aphorism  by 
saying,  “for  this  very  reason”.  “For  this  very  reason”,  from  the 
fact  that  knowledge  is  the  cause  of  liberation,  the  ritualistic 
works  like  “lighting  up  a  fire”  etc.,  that  are  enjoined  for  the 
different  orders  of  life,  are  not  required  by  knowledge  for 
producing  its  own  result.  Thus  the  present  topic  restates  the 
result  of  the  discussion  raised  under  the  first  topic;  and  the 
aphorist  does  this  with  a  view  to  adding  something  more. 

Topic  6:  Rituals  etc.  Needed  for  Knowledge 


^  ii^ii 

*Hr-3tf3TT  All  (religious  actions)  are  necessary  xf  as  well 
^-3rrfc-^:  on  the  authority  of  the  Upani$ad  prescribing 
sacrifices  etc.  This  is  like  the  horse. 

26.  On  the  strength  of  the  Upanisadic  sanction  of  sacrifices 
etc.,  all  religious  activities  as  well  are  necessary .  This  is  the  same 
as  in  the  case  of  a  horse  (in  matters  of  its  adequacy). 

The  question  to  be  considered  now  is  whether  knowledge 
derives  absolutely  no  benefit  from  the  duties  enjoined  for  the 
different  orders  of  life,  or  it  does  derive  some  benefit.  As  to 


IH.iv.26]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  783 

that,  since  it  was  concluded  under  the  previous  aphorism,  “For 
that  very  reason  the  Samiydsin  has  no  need  of  lighting  fire  etc.”, 
that  knowledge  does  not  at  all  depend  on  the  performance  of 
the  duties  of  the  different  stages  of  life  for  producing  its  own 
result  (viz  liberation),  therefore  the  answer  is  being  given,  “All 
religious  activities  are  also  necessary”  etc.  As  a  matter  of  fact 
knowledge  needs  the  help  of  all  the  duties  of  the  various  stages 
of  life,  and  it  is  not  a  fact  that  there  is  absolutely  no  dependence 
on  them  (for  purification  of  heart). 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  contradictory  to  sav  that  knowledge 
depends  and  yet  does  not  depend  on  other  duties? 

We  ( Veddntins )  answer  that  there  is  no  contradiction.  For 
once  knowledge  has  emerged,  it  does  not  depend  on  any  other 
factor  for  producing  its  (own)  result  (viz  liberation);  but  it 
does  depend  on  others  for  its  own  emergence. 

Why  so? 

“On  the  strength  of  the  Upani$adic  texts  prescribing  sacrifice 
etc.”  Thus  there  occurs  the  text,  “The  Brahmaijas  seek  to 
know  it  through  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  sacrifices,  charity, 
austerity  consisting  in  a  dispassionate  perception  of  sense- 
objects”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22),  which  shows  the  helpfulness  of  sacri¬ 
fices  etc.  to  the  attainment  of  knowledge.  Moreover,  it  is 
understood  from  their  association  with  “seeking  to  know”  (Bj:. 
IV.  iv.  22),  that  they  act  as  a  means  for  the  emergence  of 
knowledge.  Furthermore,  from  the  text,  “Now,  again,  what  is 
called  a  sacrifice  is  really  Brahmaccrrya ”  (Ch.  VIII.  v.  1), 
where  bachelor-studentship,  a  means  to  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge,  is  praised  by  comparing  it  with  sacrifices  etc.,  it 
appears  that  the  sacrifices  etc.  are  also  a  means  to  it.  Again, 
such  Upani§adic  texts  as,  “I  tell  you  briefly  of  that  goal  which 
all  the  Vedas  with  one  voice  propound,  which  all  the  austerities 
speak  of,  and  wishing  for  which  people  practice  Brahmacarya ; 
it  is  this,  viz  Orri ”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  15),  indicate  that  the  duties  of  the 
different  stages  of  life  are  helpful  to  the  acquisition  of  know¬ 
ledge.  Smfti  texts  also  support  this,  for  instance,  “The  duties 
result  in  scorching  away  sins;  the  supreme  goal  being  knowledge, 
when  sins  are  scorched  by  duties,  knowledge  begins  to  emerge”, 
and  so  on. 


784 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[III.iv.26 


“As  in  the  case  of  a  horse”  is  meant  for  illustrating  the 
adequacy  (of  sacrifices  etc.).  As  from  the  standpoint  of  pro¬ 
priety,  a  horse  is  not  employed  for  drawing  a  plough,  but  a 
chariot,  similarly  the  duties  of  the  different  stages  of  life  are 
needed  not  for  the  fruition  of  the  result  of  knowledge,  but  for 
the  emergence  of  knowledge  itself. 


cPTT-srfq  Still  one  should  be  endowed 

with  calmness,  self-control  etc.  g  for 

they  have  to  be  practised  perforce,  they  having  been 

enjoined  ^-3r’jRPTT  as  subsidiaries  of  that  (knowledge). 


27.  (Even  though  there  be  no  injunction  about  sacrifices  etc.)y 
still  one  must  be  endowed  with  self-control  and  the  like ,  since 
these  are  enjoined  as  subsidiaries  of  knowledge;  and  hence  have 
to  be  practised  as  a  matter  of  course . 


Someone  may  argue  that  sacrifices  etc.  cannot  properly  be 
the  means  to  knowledge,  because  no  injunction  (to  that  effect) 
exists,  and  because  the  text  starting  with,  “They  seek  to  know 
through  sacrifice”,  is  a  mere  restatement  (of  a  fact  known 
otherwise),  meant  for  glorifying  knowledge,  and  not  as  an 
injunction  for  sacrifices  etc.,  the  meaning  implied  being  this: 
“So  fortunate  is  knowledge  that  they  seek  to  attain  it  through 
those  very  sacrifices  etc.” 

We  ( Vedantins )  say:  Even  if  this  be  so,  still  a  seeker  after 
knowledge  must  be  endowed  with  control  of  body  and  mind 
and  such  other  virtues;  because  control  of  body  and  mind,  etc. 
are  enjoined  as  means  to  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  in  the 
text,  “Therefore  he  who  knows  it  as  such  becomes  self- 
controlled,  calm,  withdrawn  into  himself,  enduring  and  con¬ 
centrated,  and  sees  the  Self  in  his  own  self  (body)”  (Bj*.  IV. 
iv.  23),  and  because  it  is  compulsory  to  undertake  what  is 
prescribed  (by  the  scriptures). 

Opponent :  Even  here  there  is  no  injunction  but  a  statement 
in  the  present  tense  implying  that  one  sees  by  being  endowed 
with  self-control  etc. 


III.iv.27]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  785 

We  ( Vedantins )  answer  that  it  is  not  so,  since  the  idea  of 
injunction  becomes  clear  from  the  use  of  the  term  “therefore” 
which  alludes  to  the  praise  of  the  subject-matter  under  discus¬ 
sion,  and  since  the  Madhyandinas  use  a  clear  injunction  in  their 
reading  “should  see”  (in  place  of  “see”).  Hence  even  though 
there  be  no  need  of  sacrifices  etc.,  self-control  etc.  are  needed. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  sacrifices  etc.  are  also  needed  on 
the  strength  of  the  Upani$adic  text  itself  that  mentions  them. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  point  out  that  in  the  text  “(they) 
seek  to  know  through  sacrifice”  etc.  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22),  no  injunc¬ 
tion  is  discernible? 

Vedantin :  You  did  say  so;  still  from  the  uniqueness  of  the 
connection,  an  injunction  has  to  be  inferred.  For  this  connec¬ 
tion  of  “seeking  to  know”  with  “sacrifices”  etc.  is  not  known 
from  any  other  source,  in  which  case  alone  it  could  have 
occurred  here  by  way  of  a  restatement.  And  it  is  by  inferring 
an  injunction  on  the  strength  of  the  revelation  of  an  extraor¬ 
dinary  fact  in  such  texts  as,  “Since  the  sun  is  toothless,  there¬ 
fore  he  has  a  claim  to  a  share  of  offering  that  is  well  crushed”, 
where  no  injunction  is  met  with,  that  a  discussion  about  an 
(implied)  injunction  is  introduced  in  the  Purva-Mlmamsa  by 
saying,  “Crushing  for  the  sun  in  all  cases  of  ‘derivative  sacrifices’ 
(based  on  the  Daria-Purijamasa )  should  become  obvious” 
(Jai.  Su.  III.  iii.  34).  Similarly  also  it  has  been  said  herein,  “Or 
rather  there  is  an  injunction  (in  the  text)  just  as  it  is  in  the 
case  of  holding  sacrificial  fuel”  (B.  S.  III.  iv.  20).  And  in  the 
Gita  and  other  Smjtis  it  has  been  stated  elaborately  that  sacrifices 
etc.,  when  performed  without  any  motive  for  fruits,  become 
the  means  for  the  attainment  of  knowledge  by  an  aspirant  who 
desires  liberation.  Hence  sacrifices  etc.  and  self-control  etc., 
which  are  the  duties  of  the  respective  stages  of  life,  are  all 
but  means  for  the  emergence  of  knowledge.  And  yet  among 
these,  such  means  as  self-control  etc.,  which  are  connected  with 
knowledge  by  the  clause,  “He  who  knows  it  as  such”  (Bj*.  IV. 
iv.  23),  are  proximate  to  knowledge,  while  the  other  means,  viz 
sacrifices  etc.,  are  external  (i.e.  remote),  they  being  connected 
with  the  “seeking  to  know”  (Bj*.  IV.  iv.  22).  This  is  how  these 
are  to  be  distinguished. 

50 


786  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.iv.28 

Topic  7:  Restrictions  about  Food 

q4iwiyrfasr  mric^  irs» 

All  kinds  of  food  are  permitted  only  srPT- 

SRqil  when  life  is  in  danger  for  so  it  is  revealed. 

28.  All  kinds  of  food  are  permitted  only  when  life  is  in  danger ; 
for  so  it  is  revealed. 

Doubt :  In  the  anecdote  of  Praria,  as  contained  in  the  recension 
of  the  Chandogas,  the  text  occurs,  “For  a  man  who  knows 
Pritya  thus,  nothing  becomes  uneatable”  (Ch.  V.  ii.  1).  The 
Vajasaneyins  also  have  the  text,  “He  who  knows  the  food  of 
(Prjpa)  the  vital  force  to  be  such,  never  happens  to  eat  anything 
that  is  not  food  or  to  accept  anything  that  is  not  food”  (Bf. 
VI.  i.  14),  the  meaning  implied  being  that  everything  becomes 
eatable  to  him.  Now,  is  this  permission  of  everything  as  food 
meant  as  an  injunction  to  be  followed  as  a  means  to  the  acquisi¬ 
tion  of  knowledge  like  self-control  etc.,  or  is  this  a  mere  declara¬ 
tion  by  way  of  eulogy? 

Opponent :  When  under  such  a  doubt,  the  conclusion  to  be 
arrived  at  is  that  it  is  an  injunction,  for  thus  alone  can  this 
instruction  generate  a  special  tendency  (to  act),  (so  that  it  is 
an  extraordinary  instruction  implying  injunction).  Thus  it 
becomes  a  subordinate  part  of  the  meditation  on  Prtna  owing 
to  its  proximity  to  that  meditation;  and  by  being  such  a  sub¬ 
ordinate  part,  it  indicates  the  abrogation  of  the  general  rule 
(about  food). 

Objection :  If  that  be  the  case,  it  will  set  at  naught-  the  scrip¬ 
tures  making  a  division  between  things  that  can  be  eaten  and 
not  eaten. 

Opponent :  That  is  nothing  damaging,  since  this  contradic¬ 
tion  can  be  logically  reconciled  from  the  standpoints  of  a 
general  rule  and  its  exception.  For  instance,  the  prohibition  of 
animal  slaughter  is  modified  by  the  injunction  to  kill  animals  in 
sacrifices,  or  the  general  division  of  women  into  those  with 
whom  one  can  have  intercourse  and  those  with  whom  one 
cannot  is  modified  by  the  text  about  not  rejecting  any  woman 


787 


III.  iv. 28]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 

as  contained  in,  “His  vow  is  that  he  shall  not  reject  any  woman” 
(Ch.  II.  xiii.  2),  occurring  in  connection  with  the  Vamadevya 
meditation.  So  also  the  scriptural  division  between  the  eatable 
and  non-eatable  can  be  modified  by  this  text  about  eating  all 
kinds  of  food  occurring  in  connection  with  the  meditation  on 
Prana. 

Ved&ntin :  To  this  we  say  that  this  is  not  an  injunction 
permitting  the  eating  of  all  kinds  of  food,  for  no  word  of 
injunction  is  met  with  here,  inasmuch  as  the  present  tense  is 
used  in  the  expression,  “For  him  who  knows  Prfya  thus,  nothing 
becomes  uneatable”  (Ch.  V.  ii.  1).  And  even  when  no  injunc¬ 
tion  is  discernible,  one  cannot  read  into  it  an  injunction  just 
out  of  the  temptation  of  making  it  a  generator  of  a  distinct  kind 
of  activity.  Besides,  it  is  only  after  declaring  that  the  range  of 
food  for  Prtfya  extends  right  down  to  that  of  dogs  etc.,  that 
the  declaration  is  made,  “For  him  who  knows  Prapa  thus  nothing 
becomes  uneatable”.  It  is  not  possible  for  anyone  with  a  human 
body  to  eat  all  that  is  food  to  dogs  etc.,  though  it  is  possible 
for  one  to  think  that  all  these  are  food  to  the  vital  force.  Hence 
this  is  only  a  eulogy  meant  to  glorify  the  knowledge  of 
Prai.ia’s  food,  and  it  is  not  an  injunction  permitting  everything 
as  food.  And  the  fact,  that  all  kinds  of  food  can  be  permitted 
when  life  is  in  danger  is  pointed  out  by  the  aphorist.  The  idea 
expressed  is  this:  It  is  only  when  in  a  great  calamity  one’s  life 
itself  is  in  danger,  that  all  kinds  of  food  are  permitted,  for  such 
is  the  declaration  of  the  Upani$ad.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Upani$ad 
shows  in  the  br&hmaQa  portion  starting  with,  “When  the  crops 
in  the  country  of  the  Kurus  had  been  destroyed  by  hail”  etc. 
(Ch.  I.  x.  1),  that  the  sage  Cakrayapa  was  impelled  to  eat 
forbidden  food  when  in  straitened  circumstances.  A  sage  named 
Cakrayapa  under  calamitous  conditions,  ate  some  bad  black 
pulses,  a  portion  of  which  had  already  been  eaten  by  an  elephant 
driver;  but  after  the  food,  he  rejected  the  offered  drinking 
water  on  the  plea  that  the  man  had  already  drunk  from  it.  And 
the  sage  gave  the  reason  for  this,  “I  would  not  have  survived 
if  I  had  not  eaten  these  grains;  but  drinking  water  I  can  have  at 
will”  (Ch.  I.  x.  4).  Again,  the  next  day,  he  eats  the  same  stale 
pulses  left  over  after  being  eaten  by  himself  and  another.  By 


788  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iv.  28 

recounting  thus  the  eating  of  the  remnant  of  somebody  else’s 
food,  and  the  remnant  as  well  as  insipid  food,  the  Upani$ad  only 
reveals  an  eagerness  to  express  the  idea  that  when  a  question  of 
life  and  death  arises,  one  can  eat  even  a  forbidden  thing  for 
preserving  life.  But  from  the  rejection  of  the  drinking  water, 
it  is  understood  that  this  must  not  be  done  in  a  normal  state 
even  by  a  man  of  knowledge.  Hence  the  text,  “For  him  who 
knows  Prana  thus”  etc.  (Ch.  V.  ii.  1),  is  a  eulogy. 

aremre  irs.ii 

29.  And  (this  should  be  the  interpretation)  so  that  the  scrip¬ 
tures  (about  permissible  and  (or bidden  food)  may  not  be 
contradicted. 

And  the  texts,  “when  the  food  is  pure,  the  mind  becomes 
pure”  etc.  (Ch.  VII.  xxvi.  2)  and  others,  which  make  a  division 
between  what  can  be  eaten  and  what  not,  will  remain  uncon¬ 
tradicted  if  such  an  interpretation  is  accepted. 

arfq  ft#  iivhi 

3iPr  sr  Moreover  mentioned  in  the  Smjtis. 

30.  Moreover ,  the  Smftis  support  this  view. 

Moreover,  the  Smjtis  mention  that  when  a  calamity  befalls, 
all  kinds  of  food  can  be  eaten  indiscriminately  by  the  enlightened 
and  unenlightened  alike:  “Just  as  a  lotus  leaf  is  not  drenched 
by  water,  so  also  a  man,  who  eats  food  from  wherever  he  gets 
it  when  life  is  in  jeopardy,  is  not  affected  by  sin.”  So  also  the 
Smjti  speaks  of  the  avoidance  of  prohibited  food,  as  in,  “A 
Brahmaoa  shall  for  ever  avoid  wine.  They  should  pour  hot  wine 
into  the  mouth  of  a  Brahmaoa  who  drinks  liquor.  The  drunk¬ 
ards  become  worms  on  account  of  taking  prohibited  things”. 

ii^ii 

3TcT:  Hence  ^  also  5i«S:  scriptural  text  (occurs) 
prohibiting’  licence. 


III.  iv.  32  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  789 

31.  Hence  also  occur  the  scriptural  texts  prohibiting  licence. 

In  the  sarhhitd  of  the  Kathas  is  found  a  text  which  forbids  the 
eating  of  uneatable  food  and  purports  to  check  activities 
dependent  on  licence:  “Therefore  a  Brahmaoa  should  not  drink 
spirituous  liquors”.  And  that  text  becomes  all  the  more  logical 
if  the  text,  “For  a  man  who  knows  Prana  thus”  etc.  (Ch.  V.  ii. 
1),  be  a  eulogy.  Hence  texts  of  this  kind  are  eulogies  and  not 
injunctions. 

Topic  8:  Duties  of  Orders  of  Life  should  be  Fulfilled 

Doubt :  It  was  ascertained  under  the  aphorism,  “And  there  is 
need  for  all  duties”  etc.  (III.  iv.  26),  that  the  duties  of  the 
different  stages  of  life  are  conducive  to  knowledge.  The  ques¬ 
tion  being  considered  now  is  whether  those  duties  are  to  be 
performed  or  not  performed  by  a  man  who  simply  sticks  to 
his  own  stage  of  life  without  any  hankering  for  liberation  and 
any  desire  for  knowledge. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  text  “The  Brahmaijas  seek  to  know 
it  through  the  study  of  the  Vedas”  etc.  (Bj:.  IV.  iv.  22),  enjoins 
the  duties  of  the  different  stages  of  life  as  means  for  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge  and  hence  the  obligatory  duties  are 
not  to  be  performed  by  one  who  does  not  want  knowledge 
but  craves  for  some  other  result.  On  the  contrary,  should  these 
be  obligatory  for  him  also,  then  these  duties  cannot  be  conducive 
to  knowledge,  since  obligatoriness  and  unobligatoriness  cannot 
meet  at  the  same  point. 

Vedantin :  In  answer  to  this,  the  aphorist  says: 

foffrrercWWHfPl  ll^ll 

!*r  And  (the  same  time)  arPr  even  arpspT-jnT  duties  of  the 
different  orders  of  life  (are  to  be  performed)  fqffokqic(  for 
these  have  been  enjoined. 

32.  At  the  same  time  the  duties  of  the  orders  of  life  are  to  be 
performed  (by  one  who  does  not  want  liberation ),  since  these 
have  been  enjoined. 

The  obligatory  duties  are  to  be  performed  even  by  one  who 


790  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [m.iv.32 

simply  sticks  to  an  order  of  life  without  any  craving  for  libera¬ 
tion,  for  these  are  enjoined  by  such  texts  as,  “One  shall  perform 
the  Agnihotra  sacrifice  as  long  as  one  lives”.  And  yet  from  this 
point  of  view  there  can  be  no  such  criticism  that  the  very  same 
Vedic  text  is  being  overburdened  (with  too  many  purposes).* 

And  it  was  objected  that  in  that  case  these  religious  duties  will 
not  conduce  to  knowledge.  Hence  the  answer  is  being  given: 

^  \mu 

<sr  And  because  of  being  jointly  the  generators 

(of  knowledge). 

33.  And  (these  have  to  be  performed,  since  these  are  enjoined 
as)  being  jointly  the  generators  of  knowledge. 

And  these  must  be  jointly  the  generators  of  knowledge  just 
because  these  have  been  enjoined  to  be  so  in,  “The  Brahmaoas 
seek  to  know  it  through  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  sacrifices” 
etc.  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  22).  That  fact  was  stated  in  the  aphorism,  “And 
there  is  need  for  all  duties,  with  due  regard  to  adequacy,  as  in 
the  case  of  a  horse”  (III.  iv.  26).  Yet  it  is  not  to  be  concluded 
that  this  text  about  the  cooperation  ( sahakSritva )1#  of  the  duties 
of  the  stages  of  life  with  knowledge  refers  to  the  production  of 
the  result  of  knowledge,  as  in  the  case  of  PraySja  etc.  (helping  in 
the  production  of  the  result  of  Dar$a-Purijam5sa),  since  know¬ 
ledge  can  never  be  a  matter  for  injunction,  and  since  the  result 
of  knowledge  cannot  be  a  product.  For  rites  like  DarSa-Puroa- 
masa  alone,  which  can  be  subjects  of  injunction,  need  other 
cooperating  means  for  producing  such  results  as  heaven.  But 
knowledge  is  not  of  that  kind.  Thus  it  is  that  the  aphorist  said, 
“And  for  that  very  reason  there  is  no  dependence  on  such  acts 
as  lighting  up  a  sacrificial  fire,  and  so  on"  (III.  iv.  25).  Hence 
the  only  idea  implied  in  speaking  of  their  helpfulness  is  that  they 

•Few  the  sentence  enjoining  obligatory  duties  is  not  interpreted  to 
enjoin  them  as  helpful  to  knowledge,  nor  is  the  sentence  admitting  help¬ 
fulness  interpreted  to  mean  that  all  duties  are  so  under  all  circumstances. 

w  Sahakariwa  means  cooperation.  But  Ratnaprabhi  prefers  a  derivative 
meaning  as  given  under  the  aphorism. 


791 


III.iv.34]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA 

are  conducive  to  the  emergence  of  knowledge.  Yet  there  is  no 
scope  for  apprehending  here  an  opposition  arising  from  their 
obligatory  and  occasional  association  (with  the  same  person), 
because  the  association  differs  although  the  duties  are  the  same. 
For  different  is  the  obligatory  association  as  it  is  gathered  from 
the  texts  about  lifelong  performance  and  the  like.  This  does 
not  produce  knowledge  as  its  result.  Again,  occasional  is  the 
other  kind  of  association  as  gathered  from  the  text,  “The 
Brahmapas  seek  to  know  it  through  the  study  of  the  Vedas” 
etc.  (By.  IV.  iv.  22).  This  has  knowledge  as  its  result.  This  is 
)ust  like  a  sacrificial  stake  made  of  Khadira  wood  which,  through 
its  obligatory  association  with  the  sacrifice,  serves  the  purposes 
of  the  sacrifice,  but  by  occasional  association  serves  the  pur¬ 
poses  of  the  sacrificer.11 

Considered  in  every  (i.e.  either)  way,  srfa  g  however, 
ft  q*  the  very  same  (duties  are  meant)  because 

of  the  indicatory  marks  of  both  kinds. 

34.  Considered  either  way ,  however,  the  very  same  religious 
duties  are  meant  for  performance,  because  of  the  indicatory 
marks  of  both  kinds. 

“Considered  either  way” — whether  they  be  the  normal  duties 
of  the  different  orders  of  life  or  the  cooperators  in  acquiring 
knowledge,  these  very  same  religious  acts,  viz  Agnihotra  and  the 
rest,  are  to  be  performed. 

What  does  the  teacher  rule  out  then  by  his  emphasis  in,  “the 
very  same  duties”? 

We  say  that  he  rules  out  the  misconception  of  these 
being  different  from  the  (usual)  rites.  In  the  scripture  of  the 
Kupdapayin  an  Agnihotra,  different  from  the  Agnihotra 

“The  stake  is  to  be  made  according  to  injunction  from  Bilva,  Khadira, 
or  PalSia  wood  to  serve  the  purposes  of  the  sacrifice.  This  is  the  general 
rule.  But  for  a  sacrificer  who  wants  valour,  the  stake  must  be  of  Khadira. 
This  is  a  special  rule.  The  two  rules  do  not  contradict  each  other,  but  have 
their  special  fields. 


792  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iv.34 

performed  daily,  is  enjoined  in  the  text,  “One  performs  the 
Agnihotra  sacrifice  for  a  month”.  Unlike  that,  these  are  not 
different  here.  This  is  the  idea. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  the  indicatory  marks  of  both  kinds”,  on 
account  of  the  indicatory  marks  both  in  the  Vedas  and  the 
Smrtis.  As  for  the  Vedic  indicatory  mark,  it  occurs  in  the  text, 
“The  Brahmaoas  seek  to  know  it  through  the  study  of  the 
Vedas”  etc.  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22),  which  shows  the  applicability  of 
the  very  same  sacrifices  etc.  as  they  already  exist  with  their 
forms  well  determined,  but  does  not  prescribe  a  new  extraordi¬ 
nary  form  for  them,  as  is  done  by  saying  “one  sacrifices”  (i.e. 
“shall  sacrifice”).  The  indicatory  mark  in  the  Smfti  occurs  in, 
“He  who  performs  his  bounden  duty  without  leaning  to  the 
fruit  of  action”  (Gita,  VI.  1),  which  shows  how  the  rites, 
already  known  as  obligatory,  become  conducive  to  the  rise  of 
knowledge,  And  such  text  as,  “He  who  has  to  his  credit  these 
eighty-four  sanctifications”  etc.,  which  allude  to  the  fact  of 
these  Vedic  rites  being  well  known  as  sanctifying,  occur  in  the 
Smrtis  with  the  idea  of  showing  that  knowledge  arises  in  one 
who  is  sanctified  by  them.  Hence  this  emphasis  on  non¬ 
difference  is  quite  proper.  And  this  presence  of  the  indicatory 
mark  only  strengthens  the  view  that  the  rites  are  helpful  to 
knowledge. 


anfinw  ^  113*11 

^  Moreover,  (the  Vedas)  show  (the  fact 

of)  not  being  overpowered. 

35.  The  Vedas  also  show  that  one  (equipped  with  Brahma - 
carya  etc.)  is  not  overpowered. 

Moreover,  the  Vedas  show  in  the  texts  like,  “For  that  Self 
does  not  perish  which  one  attains  by  Brahmacarya”  (Ch.  VIII. 
v.  3)  etc.,  that  one  who  is  equipped  with  practices  like 
Brahmacarya  is  not  overpowered  by  the  torments  like  passion. 
Hence  the  conclusion  is  confirmed  that  sacrifices  etc.  are  not 


III.  iv.  37]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  793 

only  the  duties  pertaining  to  the  stages  of  life,  they  are  also 
helpful  in  the  rise  of  knowledge. 

Topic  9:  Knowledge  for  People  outside  Orders 

The  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  widowers  and  others,  who 
do  not  remain  affiliated  to  any  order  of  life  because  of  their 
lack  of  the  requisites  like  wealth  and  other  resources,  have  any 
competence  for  knowledge  or  not. 

Opponent :  When  under  that  doubt,  the  conclusion  should 
be  that  they  have  no  competence,  since  it  has  been  emphasized 
that  the  duties  of  the  stages  of  life  are  helpful  to  the  rise  of 
knowledge,  and  since  these  cannot  possibly  perform  any  duty 
prescribed  for  those  stages. 

3F5RT  ^nPr  3  \\\%\\ 

|  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  3RTTT  one  standing  in 
between  two  stages  (is)  srfa  also  (entitled)  f°r  suc^ 

cases  are  met  with. 

36.  As  a  matter  of  fact ,  a  person  standing  in  between  two  stages 
is  also  entitled ,  such  cases  being  met  with  (in  the  Upanisads). 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  the  answer  is  given  by 
saying,  “As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  person,  standing  in  between  two 
stages,  is  also  entitled”,  even  one  occupying  an  intermediate 
stage,  owing  to  being  debarred  from  any  one  of  them,  is  also 
entitled  to  knowledge.  • 

Why? 

“Such  cases  being  met  with  in  the  Upani$ads”;  for  Vedic  texts 
are  noticeable  which  speak  of  the  possession  of  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman  by  Raikva  (Ch.  IV.  i.  iii)  Vacaknavl  (or  Gargi) 
(Br.  III.  vi.  1),  and  others  who  were  in  similar  circumstances. 

3lfa  ^  w^3\\ 

31.  Moreover ,  the  Smrtis  also  mention  this  fact. 

Moreover,  in  the  histories  it  is  mentioned  that  Samvarta  and 
others,  who  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  duties  of  the  stages  of 


794  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  [III.iv.37 

life  owing  to  such  habits  as  remaining  naked  and  so  on,  were 
still  great  Yogins. 

Opponent :  These  are  mere  indicatory  marks  found  in  the 
Vedas  and  Smrtis  that  have  been  cited  here.  But  what  is  the 
net  result  derived  from  them? 

Vedantin  :  That  is  being  stated: 

ii^ii 

38.  And  (in  their  case)  there  can  be  the  favour  of  special 
factors  (like  japa  etc.). 

In  the  case  of  those  widowers  and  others  also,  it  is  possible 
for  knowledge  to  be  helped  by  such  virtuous  acts  as  repetition 
of  mantras  (japa),  fasting,  worship  of  gods,  etc.,  which  can  be 
resorted  to  by  men  in  general,  and  which  do  not  clash  with  the 
fact  of  one’s  standing  outside  any  stage  of  life.  In  support  of 
this  occurs  the  Smrti,  “A  Brahmaija  can  succeed  merely  through 
japa.  There  can  be  no  doubt  as  regards  this.  A  kind-hearted 
man  is  called  a  Brahmapa  irrespective  of  whether  he  does  any¬ 
thing  else  or  not”  (Manu.  II.  87),  which  shows  that  one  can 
take  up  prayer  even  though  the  performance  of  the  duties  of 
any  order  of  life  may  not  be  possible  for  him.  Moreover,  it  is 
possible  for  knowledge  to  be  helped  by  the  virtuous  deeds 
performed  in  the  different  stages  of  life  in  earlier  lives,  as  is 
evident  from  the  Smrti:  “The  Yogin,  gaining  perfection  through 
many  births,  reaches  the  highest  goal”  (Gita,  VI.  45),  which 
shows  that  particular  mental  impressions  acquired  in  past  lives 
also  help  knowledge.  And  since  knowledge  has  a  directly  per¬ 
ceptible  result,  the  mere  absence  of  any  prohibition  is  enough 
to  qualify  an  aspirant  for  liberation  to  undertake  “hearing”  etc.12 
Hence  nothing  stands  in  the  way  of  the  widowers  and  others 
also  becoming  qualified  for  pursuing  knowledge. 

awMtKwanqt  Hull 

g  But  3rt:  compared  with  this  55^  the  other  (is) 

better  fwnq  because  of  indicatory  mark  7  as  well. 

uAn  injunction  is  necessary  for  unseen  results  like  heaven  etc.,  but 
not  so  for  the  immediately  perceptible  results  like  cessation  of  ignorance. 


m.iv.40]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  795 

39.  But  as  compared  with  this ,  the  other  one  is  better ,  because 
of  indicatory  sign  (in  the  Upanifad  and  Smrtis)  as  well. 

“But  as  compared  with  this",  as  compared  with  the  fact  of 
continuing  in  the  intermediate  stages,  “the  other  one”,  the  other 
state  of  belonging  to  some  stage  of  life,  is  “better”  as  a  means 
to  the  rise  of  knowledge,  because  there  occurs  the  indicatory 
sign  in  the  Upani$ad  in,  “Any  other  knower  of  Brahman,  who 
has  done  good  deeds  and  is  identified  with  the  supreme  Light, 
also  treads  this  path”  (Br  IV.  iv.  9),  as  also  the  indications  in 
the  Smjti,  contained  in,  “A  twice-born  man  shall  not  stay  out¬ 
side  the  stages  of  life  even  for  a  day”,  and  “Should  one  stay 
outside  the  stages  of  life  for  a  year,  one  should  undertake  some 
austerity  (as  a  penance)”. 

Topic  10:  Defection  from  Monasticism 

Doubt:  It  has  been  established  that  there  are  orders  of  life 
for  the  continent  as  well.  Now  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether 
a  man  belonging  to  those  orders  can  have  any  reversion  from 
there  or  not. 

Opponent :  One  may  even  fall  back  out  of  a  desire  to  perform 
the  earlier  virtuous  deeds  well  or  owing  to  passion  etc.,  since 
no  special  reason  exists  for  not  doing  so. 

VedUntin :  This  being  the  position,  the  answer  is  given: 

towNi'twita:  u*oii 

3  But  oq-igjirCT  for  one  who  has  become  so,  ?r  (there  can 
be)  no  sr-a^-TO:  reversion  from  that  on 

account  of  restriction,  absence  of  text  (sanctioning  defection), 
and  good  precedence.  (This  is  the  view)  arflr  even  of 

Jaimini. 

40.  But  for  one  who  has  become  so,  there  can  be  no  reversion 
from  it,  on  account  of  restriction ,  absence  of  text  sanctioning 
reversion ,  and  absence  of  good  precedence.  This  is  the  view  of 
Jaimini  as  well. 


“But  for  one  who  has  become  so”,  one  who  has  embraced 


796  BRAHMA -SOTRA-BHASYA  [III.  iv.  40 

the  life  of  the  continent  ( Brahmacarin  or  Sannyasin ),  “there 
can  be  no  reversion  from  it,”  no  falling  back  from  it,  under  any 
circumstances. 

Why? 

“On  account  of  restriction,  absence  of  texts  about  reversion 
from  such  a  life,  and  absence  of  good  precedence.”  Thus  the 
restrictive  rule  occurring  in  the  following  texts  shows  the 
absence  of  reversion:  “One  who  spends  his  whole  life  in  the 
teacher’s  house”  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1),  “The  path  indicated  by  the 
scripture  is  that  one  shall  retire  to  the  forest;  and  the  esoteric 
(purport  of  the  scripture)  about  it  is  that  one  shall  not  return 
from  there”,  “Being  permitted  by  the  teacher,  he  shall  duly 
follow  one  of  the  four  stages  of  life  till  the  body  falls  off”,  and 
others.  And  though  we  meet  with  sentences  speaking  of  ascen¬ 
sion  to  a  higher  order,  such  as,  “After  finishing  the  Brahma- 
carings  life,  one  shall  become  a  householder”  (Ja.  4),  “One  shall 
embrace  monasticism  from  the  Brahmacarin' s  life  itself”  (ibid.), 
yet  we  do  not  come  across  sentences  sanctioning  reversion.  Nor 
do  good  precedents  exist. 

As  for  the  argument  that  there  can  be  a  falling  back  from  a 
desire  to  perform  well  the  (wonted)  earlier  duties,  that  is 
invalid,  since  the  Smjti  declares,  “Better  is  one’s  own  duty 
though  imperfect,  than  the  duty  of  another  well  performed” 
(Gita,  III.  35).  Logic  also  supports  this;  for  one’s  own  duty 
is  that  which  has  been  prescribed  (by  the  scriptures)  for  one, 
and  not  what  one  can  perform  well,  since  duty  is  determined 
by  scriptural  injunction.  And  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as 
(exoneration  of)  defection  owing  to  passion  etc.,  for  the  scrip¬ 
tural  restriction  is  more  authoritative.  By  saying  “(This  is  the 
view)  of  Jaimini  as  well”,  the  aphorist  points  out  the  concur¬ 
rence  of  Jaimini  and  Badarayaija  in  this  matter,  so  that  our 
conviction  may  become  all  the  more  strong. 

Topic  11:  Expiation  or  Transgression  of  Celibacy 

=sr  And  srPr  even  (that  expiation)  anftwRvq  mentioned  in 
Adhikara-Lakfapa  (Jai.  Su.  VI.)  ^  (is)  not  (meant)  (for  him) 


III.  iv.  42  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  797 

since  his  fall  is  inferred  (from  the  Smjti)  (to  be 
without  remedy).  (and)  hence  he  has  no  connection 

with  it. 

41.  And  even  an  expiation  is  not  available  for  him ,  since  his 
fall  is  known  from  the  Smjti  to  be  irremediable ,  and  he  has  no 
connection  with  it. 

Doubt :  If  a  ( Naitfhika )  Brahmacdrin ,  wedded  to  lifelong 
continence,  breaks  his  vow  through  some  inadvertence,  can  he  or 
can  he  not  undertake  a  penance  as  enjoined  in,  “A  Brahmacdrin , 
falling  from  his  vow,  shall  sacrifice  a  donkey  to  Nirtti”? 

The  answer  (of  the  opponent)  is,  no.  As  for  expiation  men¬ 
tioned  in  the  chapter  dealing  with  qualification  (in  the  Purva- 
Mlmamsa)  in  the  aphorism,  “The  offering  of  the  animal  in  the 
case  of  a  Brahmacdrin  breaking  his  vow  is  to  be  made,  as  in  the 
upanayana  sacrifice,  in  the  ordinary  fire;  for  the  time  for  lighting 
up  the  Ahavanlya  fire  (after  marriage)  is  not  ripe  (in  the  case 
of  the  Brahmacdrin^  ( Jai.  Su.  VI.  viii.  21),  that  too  cannot 
apply  to  the  lifelong  Brahmacdrin. 

What  is  the  reason? 

Since  the  Smfti  mentions  that  this  fall  cannot  be  set  right,  “For 
one  who  after  being  established  in  the  norm  of  the  lifelong 
celibate  ( Naitfhika )  falls  from  it,  we  cannot  imagine  any  expia¬ 
tion  by  which  that  self-immolating  man  can  be  purified”;  for 
no  remedy  is  possible  for  one  whose  head  is  cut  off.  But  that 
expiation  is  possible  for  an  upakurvdna  Brahmacdrin  (who 
would  marry  after  finishing  his  studies),  since  that  kind  of 
absolute  fall  is  not  mentioned  in  his  case. 


^  However  irfc  some  (consider  this)  a  minor  sign, 

(and  admit)  existence  (of  expiation),  s^FT-q^as  in  a  case 

of  eating  (forbidden  food);  so  it  is  explained  (by 

Jaimini). 


42.  Some,  however,  consider  this  to  be  a  minor  sin  and  concede 
expiation  as  in  a  case  of  eating  forbidden  fooa.  So  it  is  explained 
by  Jaimini. 


798  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.  iv. 42 

On  the  contrary,  “some”,  some  teachers,  think  that  it  is  only 
a  minor  sin.  If  a  lifelong  celibate  breaks  his  vow  by  misbehaving 
with  a  woman  other  than  his  teacher’s  wife  for  instance,  that 
does  not  constitute  a  major  sin  (mahdpdtaka) ,  since  it  has  not 
been  counted  among  such  major  sins  as  dishonouring  one’s 
teacher’s  wife.  Hence  they  assert  that  a  lifelong  celibate  can 
have  expiation  just  as  much  as  a  upakurvdTta  Brahmacdrin ,  since 
they  are  on  the  same  footing  as  Brahmacdrins  and  breakers  of 
their  vow.  And  this  is  as  in  the  case  of  eating  prohibited  food. 
Just  as  a  Brahmacdrin,  who  breaks  his  vow  by  drinking  wine  or 
eating  meat,  can  be  purified  again,  so  also  is  the  case  here.  Those 
who  assert  that  a  lifelong  celibate  who  slips  can  have  no 
expiation  cannot  produce  any  text  to  that  effect.  But  those 
who  assert  that  he  can  have  an  expiation  have  as  their  support 
the  text,  “A  Bralrmacdrin  falling  from  his  vow  shall  sacrifice  a 
donkey  to  Nirjti”  which  is  applicable  to  both  classes.  Hence  the 
existence  of  expiation  is  the  more  reasonable  position.  And  this 
is  in  accord  with  what  has  been  stated  in  a  chapter  of  the 
Purva-Mlmaihsa  in  the  aphorisms,  “Should  it  be  maintained 
that  either  can  be  understood  as  equally  applicable”  (Jai.  Su. 
I.  iii.  8),  (then  the  answer  is  that)  “the  comprehension  must  be 
according  to  what  is  stated  in  the  scripture,  for  virtuous  deeds 
are  determined  by  them”18  (Jai.  Su.  I.  iii.  9).  This  being  the 
case,  the  mention  of  the  absence  of  expiation  in  the  Smrti  is 
to  be  explained  as  meant  for  inducing  (in  the  lifelong  celibate) 
an  intensity  of  effort  (for  keeping  his  vow).  Thus  also  it  is  to 
be  kept  in  mind  that  expiations  are  prescribed  for  the  mendi¬ 
cants  and  the  forest-dwellers  in  such  texts  as,  “Should  a  forest- 
dweller  break  the  vow  of  his  order,  he  shall  undertake  a  penance 
for  twelve  days  and  help  in  growing  grass  on  the  grazing 
ground”,  “Should  a  mendicant  break  his  vow,  he  shall,  just  like 
the  Vanaprastha  tend  the  pasture  barring  the  cultivation  of  Soma 

*A  passage  in  the  Veda  speaks  of  pudding  made  of  yava.  Now  yava , 
generally  meaning  barley,  somedmes  means  a  different  kind  of  grain. 
Following  such  popular  usage  the  opponent  would  have  the  pudding 
made  of  either.  But  the  conclusion,  drawn  from  another  Vedic  passage, 
which  clearly  describes  yava  as  meaning  barley,  is  that  barley  alone  is  to 
be  used,  for  that  conforms  with  the  scripture. 


ni.iv.44]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  799 

plants,  and  he  shall  undertake  the  purificatory  rites  according 
to  the  Vedic  branch  he  belongs  to”. 

Topic  12:  They  are  to  be  Excommunicated 

tqfawrcra  11*311 

^  But  srfr  even  gjpmT  in  either  case  9rf$:  (they  are  to  be 
kept)  outside  (society)  in  compliance  with  Smj-ti  ^  and 
good  conduct. 

43.  (Whether  their  transgression  constitutes  a  major  or  a 
minor  sin),  they  are  to  be  kept  outside  in  either  case  in  accord¬ 
ance  with  Smrti  texts  and  behaviour  of  good  people. 

Whether  the  lapse  of  the  continent  people  from  their 
respective  orders  of  life  constitutes  a  minor  sin  or  a  major  one, 
in  either  case  they  are  to  be  expelled  from  society  by  the  good 
people,  because  of  the  extreme  condemnation  shown  in  such 
Smrti  texts  as,  “For  one  who  after  being  established  in  the  norm 
of  the  lifelong  celibate,  falls  from  it,  we  cannot  imagine  any 
expiation  by  which  that  self-immolating  man  can  be  purified”, 
“One  shall  undertake  the  Candrayapa  (expiatory  rite)  if  one 
happens  to  touch  a  Brahmapa  fallen  from  a  higher  stage  of  life, 
excommunicated  from  his  own  society,  or  dead  through  hanging 
or  by  being  bitten  by  some  insect”.  This  also  follows  from  the 
behaviour  of  the  good  people.  For  decent  people  do  not  under¬ 
take  any  sacrifice,  study,  or  matrimonial  ceremony  in  associa¬ 
tion  with  them. 

Topic  13:  Meditations  Connected  with  Rites 

Wlfiw  IIWII 

(The  meditations  subserving  religious  acts)  are  for 

(i.e.  are  to  be  undertaken  by)  the  sacrificer  because 

the  Upani$ads  mention  the  results,  thus  (says)  arrfa: 
Atreya. 

44.  The  teacher  Atreya  thinks  that  the  agentship  for  medita- 


800  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [III.iv.44 

tions  belongs  to  the  master  of  the  sacrifice ,  since  the  Upanifads 
mention  their  results . 

Doubt :  With  regard  to  the  meditations  connected  with  the 
different  parts  of  a  sacrifice,  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  they 
are  to  be  undertaken  by  the  sacrificer  or  the  priests.  What 
would  be  the  conclusion  here? 

Atreya  :  They  are  to  be  undertaken  by  the  sacrificer. 

Why? 

On  account  of  the  mention  of  results.  For  the  results  are 
stated  thus:  “Rain  pours  down  for  him  who  having  such  a 
knowledge  meditates  on  the  five  kinds  of  Sama  as  rain;  and  he 
can  make  rain  pour  down  for  others  also”  (Ch.  II.  iii.  2).  Logi¬ 
cally  a  result  should  go  to  the  master,  for  the  ceremony  as  a 
whole  (with  its  parts)  is  enjoined  for  him,  and  the  results  of 
such  meditations  are  prescribed  for  one  who  is  empowered  for 
the  main  rite.  Moreover,  from  the  Upani$ad  it  is  known  that 
the  result  of  the  meditation  belongs  to  the  meditators,  as  stated 
in,  “Rain  pours  down  for  him  who  meditates”  (ibid.)  etc. 

Objection :  Is  not  the  priest  also  seen  to  derive  a  result,  as 
stated  in,  “Whatever  objects  this  chanter,  possessed  of  such 
knowledge,  desires  either  for  himself  or  for  the  sacrificer,  he 
secures  by  chanting”  (Bf.  I.  iii.  28)? 

Atreya :  No,  because  the  result  accrues  there  to  the  priest  on 
the  strength  of  the  text.14  Hence  the  teacher  Atreya  is  of  opinion 
that  the  master  himself  of  the  rite  (i.e.  the  sacrificer)  has  to 
undertake  the  meditations  bearing  fruits. 

<H IhrtUl 

It  is  the  priest’s  duty  so  says  Audulomi 

for  for  that  (work),  vfofNct  (he)  is  retained. 

45.  The  (teacher)  Audulomi  says  that  it  is  the  duty  of  the 


“That  text  states  an  exception  to  the  general  rule;  it  does  not  override 
that  rule. 


III.iv.47]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  801 

priest  (to  undertake  such  meditations ),  for  he  is  retained  for 
that. 

The  teacher  Aucjulomi  is  of  opinion  that  there  is  no  such 
rule  that  the  meditations  are  to  be  undertaken  by  the  sacrificer. 
They  should  be  undertaken  by  the  priest. 

What  is  the  reason? 

For  a  priest  is  retained  (by  the  sacrificer)  for  the  performance 
of  the  rite  together  with  its  parts;  and  such  meditations  as  on 
the  Udgitha  are  included  in  that  performance,  since  the  compe¬ 
tence  for  the  performance  of  the  parts  is  derived  from  that  for 
the  main  rite.  Hence  the  meditations  have  to  be  performed  by 
the  priests  on  such  analogy  as  regulation  of  the  milking  of  a 
cow  (by  the  priest  for  one  who  owns  it).  It  is  thus  that  the 
Upani$ad  shows  in  the  following  text  how  the  meditation  is  to 
be  undertaken  by  the  Udgata  (priest  singing  the  Sama),  “Baka, 
son  of  Dalbha,  knew  that  Udgitha,  and  he  became  the  Udgata 
of  the  people  in  the  Naimi$a  forest”  (Ch.  I.  ii.  13).  As  for  the 
assertion  that  the  result  is  seen  in  the  Upani$ad  to  accrue  to  the 
sacrificer,  that  creates  no  difficulty,  since  the  priests  act  for 
others,  and  the  fruits  cannot  accrue  to  them  unless  a  text  says 
so  explicitly- (as  an  exception). 

^«r  iiy^u 

46.  And  from  Vedic  texts  also  (this  stands  confirmed). 

“He  said,  ‘whatever  blessing  the  priests  pray  for  in  a  sacrifice, 
they  pray  for  it  for  the  sacrificer  alone’  ”  (Sa.  B.  I.  iii.  i.  28), 
“Hence  an  Udgata,  possessed  of  this  knowledge,  will  ask,  ‘What 
desire  shall  I  fulfil  for  you  by  singing?’  ”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  8-9),  such 
texts  show  that  the  result  of  the  meditation  undertaken  by  the 
priests  accrues  to  the  sacrificer.  Hence  it  is  concluded  that  the 
meditations  on  things  forming  parts  of  a  sacrificial  act  are  to 
be  undertaken  by  the  priests. 

Topic  14:  Injunction  about  Meditativeness 

Doubt :  In  the  Bjrhadaraoyaka  Upani$ad  (III.  v.  1)  occurs 
the  text,  “Therefore  the  Brahmaoa,  having  known  all  about 
51 


802  BRAHMA -SOTRA-BHA5YA  [III.iv.47 

scholarship  (pdrrfitya),  should  try  to  live  ( balyena, ,  i.e.)  upon 
that  strength  which  comes  of  knowledge14;  having  known  all 
about  this  strength  as  well  as  scholarship,  he  becomes  meditative 
(muni);  having  known  all  about  meditativeness  and  its  opposite, 
he  becomes  a  Brahmaoa  (knower  of  Brahman)”.  The  doubt 
arises  here  whether  meditativeness  is  enjoined  here  or  not. 

Opponent :  When  under  such  a  predicament,  the  conclusion 
to  be  arrived  at  is  that  it  is  not  enjoined,  since  the  injunction 
ends  with,  “should  try  to  live  upon  that  strength  which  comes 
of  knowledge”  (ibid.).  Beyond  that  no  verbal  ending,  denoting 
an  injunction,  is  met  with  in  “he  becomes  meditative”  (ibid.). 
Hence  this  is  a  mere  re-statement  of  a  known  fact. 

Objection :  How  is  it  gathered  that  it  is  a  known  fact? 

Opponent :  Since  the  terms  “meditative”  and  “scholar”  imply 
knowledge,  meditativeness  becomes  already  known  in  the  text, 
“having  known  all  about  scholarship”  (ibid.).  Moreover,  it  is 
obvious  that  the  text,  “having  known  all  about  meditativeness 
and  its  opposite,  he  becomes  a  Brahmaija”  (ibid.),  does  not 
purport  to  enjoin  Brahmaoahood,  since  the  term  Brahmaria  had 
ocurred  even  earlier.  Hence  just  as  much  as  “he  becomes  a 
Brahmaqa”  is  said  by  way  of  praise,  so  also  should  the  sentence 
“he  becomes  meditative*’  be  a  praise  (of  the  strength  that  comes 
from  mediate  knowledge),  since  both  have  the  same  form  of 
expression.15 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  say: 


:  *^1  iiwsii 


q ffil  r<-3RR-fgtf?:  An  injunction  is  implied  about  the  other 
auxiliary  (viz  meditativeness),  (which  is)  the  third, 


uBalyena  may  also  mean,  “through  childlike  innocence  and  purity  of 
heart”.  Knowledge  here  means  mediate  knowledge,  which  leads  to  imme¬ 
diate  knowledge,  enlightenment. 

15  According  to  the  Vedantin,  panditya  (scholarship)  implies  sravcnia 
(hearing),  balya  (strength  coming  from  knowledge)  implies  mancma> 
consisting  in  eliminating  the  idea  of  impossibility  with  the  help  of' reason^ 
ing;  and  muni  means  one  engaged  in  mdidhyasana .  The  Vedantin  main¬ 
tains  that  a  man  aspiring  for  liberation  must  undertake  nididbyasamt .  The 
opponent  denies  this. 


III.  iv.  47  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTR A  -  BHA$YA  803 

for  one  who  is  possessed  of  that  (knowledge)  q$pir  in 
a  case  of  partial  application  (to  knowledge)  like 

the  main  injunction  (being  applicable  to  the  subsidiary  acts). 

47.  In  case  of  a  partial  application  to  knowledge  by  one 
possessed  of  ( imperfect )  knowledge ,  an  injunction  is  implied 
in  another  auxiliary  which  is  the  third;  this  is  like  the  main 
injunction  being  applied  to  the  subsidiary  acts . 

In  the  case  of  meditativeness  which  leads  to  enlightenment, 
an  injunction  has  to  be  admitted  as  much  as  in  the  cases  of  the 
“strength  which  comes  of  knowledge”  and  “scholarship”  on 
account  of  its  uniqueness  (of  not  having  been  heard  elsewhere). 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  pointed  out  that  meditativeness  is 
already  implied  by  the  word  scholarship? 

Vedantin  :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  since  the  term  “muni” 
(lit.  sage)  implies  an  abundance  of  knowledge,  and  it  is  possible 
to  derive  the  word  in  the  sense  of  “one  who  contemplates”. 
Moreover,  such  usage  is  met  with  as,  “Among  the  munis  (con 
templative  sages)  I  am  Vyasa”  (Gita.  X.  37). 

Opponent :  The  word  “muni”  is  seen  to  refer  to  the  highest 
stage  of  life  (monasticism),  as  in  “the  householder’s  life,  life  in 
the  teacher’s  home,  life  of  a  muni,  and  life  in  the  forest”. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  a  different  meaning16  is  noticed  in  such 
usages  as  “Valmiki,  the  greatest  muni  (sage)”.  In  the  text  quoted 
above,  the  word  muni  can  be  understood  to  mean  the  highest 
stage,  for  it  is  mentioned  along  with  the  others,  and  monasti¬ 
cism  alone  remains  to  be  mentioned  after  them,  and  because 
this  highest  stage  of  life  is  distinguished  by  a  predominance 
of  knowledge.  Hence  this  “meditativeness”  which  is  a  third 
factor  counted  along  with  “strength  arising  from  knowledge” 
and  “scholarship”,  and  consists  in  an  abundance  of  knowledge, 
is  enjoined  here.  And  the  assertion  was  made  that  the  injunction 
culminates  with  “the  strength  arising  from  knowledge”.  Even 

l0Maunai  according  to  the  opponent  means  knowledge  or  monasticism, 
which  are  spoken  of  elsewhere,  and  so  need  no  fresh  injunction.  The 
Vedantin  says:  It  means  excellence  of  knowledge,  which  is  a  new  idea 
needing  a  new  injunction. 


804  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [ffl.iv.47 

so  we  resort  to  an  injunction  in  the  case  of  meditativeness  by 
construing  the  sentence  to  mean,  “one  should  become  medi¬ 
tative”;  for  it  is  unique.  Again,  from  the  fact  that  meditativeness 
is  spoken  of  as  a  thing  to  be  acquired,  it  follows  that  an  injunc¬ 
tion  has  to  be  accepted  about  it  as  in  the  cases  of  “strength”  and 
“scholarship”. 

By  “for  one  possessed  of  that”,  is  to  be  understood,  “for  the 
monk,  possessed  of  knowledge”. 

Opponent :  How  is  it  known  that  the  monk  possessed  of 
knowledge  is  meant? 

Ved&ntin :  From  the  fact  that  the  context  deals  with  him 
(i.e.  his  competence)  as  is  obvious  from,  “knowing  this  very  Self 
the  Brahma^as  renounce17  the  desire  for  sons,  for  wealth,  and 
for  worlds  and  lead  the  mendicant’s  life”  (Bj\  III.  v.  1). 

Opponent :  If  one  has  knowledge,  the  perfection  of  that 
knowledge  follows  as  a  matter  of  course.  So  what  is  the  need 
of  prescribing  meditation? 

Ved&nttn :  It  is  hence  that  the  aphorist  says,  “in  case  of 
partial  application”.  The  idea  implied  is  this:  This  injunction  is 
made  from  the  point  of  view  of  one  whose  knowledge  cannot 
achieve  perfection  owing  to  the  dominance  of  dualistic  ideas. 
“Like  subsidiary  injunctions  based  on  the  main  one” — the  idea 
implied  is  this:  As  from  the  (main)  injunction  like,  “one  desiring 
heaven  should  perform  the  DarSa-Purpamasa  sacrifice”,  the 
subsidiary  acts  like  the  lighting  of  fire  etc.  are  assumed  to  be 
prescribed  (though  no  clear  injunction  is  discernible),  they 
being  helpful  to  the  main  sacrifice,  so  also  it  is  admitted  that 
meditativeness  is  prescribed  here  in  this  context  of  knowledge, 
although  injunction  cannot  play  any  dominant  part  here.18 

Opponent :  When  monastdcism  with  its  characteristic  of 
“strength  derived  from  knowledge”  stands  there  as  a  stage  of 

17  After  an  intellectual  comprehension  they  renounce  for  complete 
enlightenment:  A  fnonk  alone  can  be  fully  meditative. 

“The  opponent  argues:  “When  a  man  has  known  from  the  scripture 
and  reasoning  that  Brahman  alone  is  real  and  all  duality  is  unreal, 
the  striving  for  full  enlightenment  will  follow  from  the  aspiration 
itself  of  the  man,  so  that  an  injunction  about  meditativeness  is  uncalled 
for.”  The  Vedantin  answers:  “The  topic  here  is  of  monasticism  and 


ni.iv.49]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  805 

life  sanctioned  by  the  Vedas,  why  should  the  conclusion  have 
been  made  in  the  Chandogya  text  with  the  householder  as  the 
last  as  in,  “Having  finished  his  studies  and  embraced  the  life 
of  the  householder,  (he  attains  the  world  of  Brahman)”  (Ch. 
VIII.  xv.  1).  By  concluding  thus,  the  Upanijad  displays  a 
preference  for  him. 

Vedantin:  Hence  the  aphorist  replies: 

^  But  on  account  of  its  all-inclusiveness 

the  conclusion  (is)  with  the  householder. 

48.  But  the  conclusion  is  made  (in  the  Ch&ndogya  Upanifad) 
'with  the  householder y  since  he  has  an  all-inclusive  life . 

The  word  “but”  is  used  to  make  a  distinction.  The  distinct 
feature  of  the  householder  is  that  he  has  an  all-comprehensive 
life.  For  the  scriptures  have  prescribed  for  him  many  duties 
of  his  own  stage  of  life  such  as  sacrifices,  which  involve  great 
effort,  and  he  has  also  to  practise  the  virtuous  duties  of  other 
stages,  as  far  as  possible,  such  as  non-injury,  control  of  senses, 
etc.  Hence  it  involves  no  contradiction  to  end  with  the  house¬ 
holder. 


Since  there  is  injunction  arfir  even  of  the 

others  (i.e.  stages  of  life)  like  meditativeness. 

49.  Since  there  is  injunction  even  about  the  others ,  just  as 
much  as  of  meditativeness . 

Just  as  much  as  the  two  stages  of  life,  viz  meditativeness  (i.e. 
monasticism)  and  married  life,  are  approved  by  the  Vedas,  so 

sravcma  etc.  are  its  complements.  The  unique  fact  about  all  of  them  here 
is  that  they  are  causes  of  enlightenment.  And  this  uniqueness  calls  for  an 
injunction.  Although  an  injunction  is  unnecessary  for  one  who  is  already 
enlightened,  it  is  necessary  for  one  whose  knowledge  has  not  matured. 


806 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[III.  iv.49 


also  are  the  other  two,  viz  life  in  the  forest  and  life  in  the 
teacher’s  home.  For  the  relevant  text  was  pointed  out  earlier: 
“Austerity  is  the  second,  and  the  third  is  the  Brahmacdrin  living 
in  his  teacher’s  home”  etc.  (Ch.  II.  xxiii.  1).  Thus  because  the 
four  stages  of  life  are  enjoined  equally,  there  is  an  option  of 
belonging  to  any  one  of  them  singly  or  to  all  of  them  succes¬ 
sively.  The  plural  (rather  than  the  dual  number)  in  the  term 
“others  (i.e.  other  stages  of  life”)  indicating  the  two  stages  of 
life,  occurs  because  of  the  variety  of  their  sub-divisions  or  the 
multiplicity  of  their  adherents.  This  is  how  it  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood. 

Topic  15:  The  Childlike  State 

(Balya,  i.e.  the  childlike  state  means  behaviour) 
without  display  (of  parts),  for  so  it  fits  in  with  the 

context. 

SO.  (The  'word  c bdlya 9  in  the  Bjhaddranyaka  means  that  a  man 
of  enlightenment  should  behave  like  a  child)  without  displaying 
his  parts ,  for  so  it  fits  in  with  the  context. 

Doubt :  In  the  text,  “Therefore  the  Brahmaija,  having  known 
all  about  scholarship  ( panditya ),  should  try  to  live  a  childlike 
life  (bdlyenaY  (Bj\  III.  v.  1),  bdlya  appears  as  a  thing  to  be 
followed.  Now  the  word  bdlya  is  derived  from  the  word  bala 
(child)  with  the  help  of  a  suffix,  so  that  the  word  means  either 
the  state  of  a  child  or  the  conduct  of  a  child.  But  a  child’s 
state,  meaning  a  certain  age,  cannot  be  achieved  at  will.  So  it 
may  mean  either  childlike  behaviour  like  answering  calls  of 
nature  just  as  they  occur  or  the  qualities  of  guilelessness,  free¬ 
dom  from  egoism  and  pride,  and  the  undeveloped  state  of  the 
organs?  This  is  the  doubt.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  The  meaning  of  the  word  bdlya  is  more  well 
known  in  the  world  as  behaving,  talking,  eating  at  will,  and 
answering  calls  of  nature  just  as  they  occur.  Hence  it  is  reason¬ 
able  to  accept  this. 


III.  iv.  5 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  807 

Objection :  It  is  not  reasonable  that  he  should  resort  to 
unrestrained  behaviour,  as  that  would  lay  him  open  to  the 
charge  of  degrading  himself  through  such  wilful  transgression. 

Opponent :  No,  since  a  monk  with  enlightenment  will  remain 
free  from  blemish  on  the  strength  of  scriptural  authority,  like 
one  in  such  matters  as  killing  animals  (in  a  sacrifice). 

Veddntin:  This  being  the  conclusion,  the  answer  is  that  it 
cannot  be  so,  since  this  text  can  have  some  other  meaning.  For 
one  should  not  think  in  terms  of  overriding  an  injunction  in 
case  one  can  get  something  else  as  the  meaning  of  bdlya  that 
does  not  contradict  that  injunction.  Moreover,  an  auxiliary  is 
prescribed  for  aiding  the  main  factor.  The  continuance  in 
knowledge  is  the  main  thing  here  that  has  to  be  practised  by 
the  monks;  and  the  pursuit  of  knowledge  will  cease  to  be  a 
possibility  if  childlike  behaviour  be  adopted  in  its  totality.  Hence 
by  the  term  bdlya  is  to  be  understood  here  some  inward  state 
of  a  child  such  as  having  immature  functional  ability  etc.  That 
fact  is  referred  to  by  the  aphorist  in,  “without  any  display”. 
That  is  to  say,  without  showing  himself  off  by  parading  his 
wisdom,  learning,  virtuousness,  etc.;  he  should  be  free  from 
pride,  conceit,  etc.  like  a  child  who,  owing  to  the  immaturity 
of  his  senses,  does  not  try  to  make  a  display  of  himself  before 
others.  Thus  interpreted,  the  (Upani$adic)  text  reveals  a  meaning 
that  logically  reinforces  the  main  injunction.  And  thus  it  has 
been  stated  by  the  authors  of  the  Smftis  in,  “He  is  a  Brahmana 
whom  nobody  recognizes  either  as  an  aristocrat  or  a  commoner, 
either  as  well-read  or  not  well-read,  either  as  well-behaved  or 
not  well-behaved.  A  man  of  enlightenment  should  resort  to 
unostentatious  behaviour  while  following  his  spiritual  practices 
in  secret.  He  should  roam  over  the  earth  like  a  blind  man  (not 
attracted  by  sense-objects),  like  one  benumbed  (i.e.  without  the 
sense  of  taste  etc.),  like  one  who  is  dumb  (i.e.  without  active 
organs)”,  and  “without  any  outer  sign  and  with  unostentatious 
behaviour”  etc. 

Topic  16:  Time  of  Fruition  of  Knowledge 

(The  fruition  may  be)  arfo  even  in  this  life  anHRJtT- 


808  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [III.iv.51 

srftrarST  if  there  is  no  obstruction  to  what  (means)  is  adopted; 
q^-OT«lT<[  f°r  so  it  is  seen  (m  the  Upani§ads). 

51.  The  generation  of  knowledge  takes  place  even  in  this  life 
if  there  is  no  obstruction  to  the  means  adopted .  For  this  is  what 
is  revealed  (by  the  Upanisads). 

Doubt :  The  means  of  knowledge,  both  higher  and  lower, 
have  been  ascertained  under  the  aphorisms  starting  with,  “And 
all  religious  duties  are  necessary  on  the  strength  of  the  Upani- 
$adic  sanction  of  sacrifice  etc.”  (III.  iv.  26).  Now  the  question 
to  be  considered  is  whether  the  knowledge,  resulting  from 
them,  emerges  in  this  very  life  or  sometimes  even  in  a  later  life. 
What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  It  fructifies  here  itself. 

Objection :  What  is  the  reason? 

Opponent :  Because  enlightenment  is  preceded  by  “hearing” 
etc.,  and  nobody  engages  in  “hearing”  etc.  with  the  motive, 
“May  enlightenment  come  to  me  in  the  next  world”.  As  a 
fact,  however,  a  man  is  seen  to  engage  in  them  with  the  purpose 
of  having  enlightenment  emerge  in  the  very  same  life.  Sacrifices 
etc.  also  are  helpful  to  the  generation  of  knowledge  through 
the  medium  of  hearing  etc.,  since  knowledge  is  generated  by 
its  valid  means.  Hence  the  birth  of  enlightenment  must  occur 
in  this  very  life. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  our  answer  is:  “The 
generation  of  knowledge  takes  place  even  in  this  life  if  there  is 
no  obstruction  to  the  means  adopted”.  The  idea  implied  is  this: 
Knowledge  is  possible  even  in  this  life,  provided  the  means 
adopted  for  enlightenment  are  not  obstructed  in  any  way  by 
some  other  result  of  past  work  that  fructifies  just  then.  Should 
it,  however,  be  obstructed,  the  fruition  comes  in  a  subsequent 
birth.  The  fructification  of  a  past  act  occurs  from  a  (suitable) 
concurrence  of  space,  time,  and  causation.  And  there  can  be  no 
such  rule  that  the  very  same  space,  time,  and  causation  that  lead 
to  the  fruition  of  one  act,  also  lead  to  the  fruition  of  some  other 
act,  since  acts  can  have  opposite  results.  Moreover,  the  scriptures 
stop  by  stating  merely  that  a  particular  act  has  a  particular 


III.iv.52] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


809 


result;  they  do  not  enunciate  also  the  peculiar  space,  time,  and 
causation.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  some  supersensuous  power 
manifests  itself  with  regard  to  some  acts  owing  to  the  assiduous 
application  of  its  means,  while  the  power  of  some  other  act 
remains  arrested  under  its  influence.  It  is  not  a  fact  that  a  motive 
for  rise  of  knowledge  either  here  or  hereafter  cannot  be  enter¬ 
tained  equally,  since  the  motive,  “May  I  get  knowledge  either 
in  this  life  or  the  next”,  can  be  held  freely.  Even  when  know¬ 
ledge  emerges  from  “hearing”  etc.,  it  arises  only  after  the 
impediments  wear  away.  This  is  why  the  Upani§ad  shows  the 
inscrutability  of  the  Self  in  the  text,  “Of  that  (Self)  which  is 
not  available  for  the  mere  hearing  to  many  and  which  many  do 
not  understand,  the  expounder  is  wonderful  and  the  receiver  is 
wonderful,  and  wonderful  is  he  who  knows  under  the  instruc¬ 
tion  of  an  adept”  (Ka.  I.  ii.  7).  And  when  the  Upani$ad  says  that 
Vamadeva  realized  the  state  of  Brahman  even  when  in  his 
mother’s  womb  (Ai.  II.  i.  5),  it  only  shows  that  knowledge 
may  emerge  in  a  succeeding  birth  as  a  result  of  practices  gone 
through  in  an  earlier  life;  for  a  child,  in  the  womb  itself,  cannot 
possibly  undertake  any  practice  that  is  usually  gone  through  in 
this  world.  In  the  Smj*ti  also  it  is  seen  that,  being  questioned  by 
Arjuna,  “What  end  does  one,  failing  to  gain  perfection  in  Yoga, 
meet,  O  Kfsoa?”  (Gita,  VI.  37),  the  Lord  Krwa  says,  “For  the 
doer  of  good,  O  my  son,  never  comes  to  grief”  (Gita,  VI.  40); 
then  again  he  speaks  of  his  (i.e.  of  the  fallen  Yogin’s)  attain¬ 
ment  of  virtuous  worlds  and  birth  in  virtuous  families;  and  then 
in  the  passage  beginning  with,  “There  he  is  equipped  with  the 
intelligence  acquired  in  his  former  body”,  etc.  and  ending  with, 
“gaining  perfection  through  many  births  he  reaches  the  highest 
goal”  (Gita,  VI.  43-45),  Sri  Krsoa  reveals  the  very  same  fact. 
Hence  the  conclusion  is  confirmed  that  knowledge  arises  either 
in  this  life  or  a  subsequent  one  depending  on  the  removal  of 
impediment. 

Topic  17:  Liberation  is  Uniform  Everywhere 

Doubt :  In  the  case  of  an  aspirant  for  liberation,  who  adopts 
the  means  of  knowledge,  a  rule,  applicable  to  each  individually, 
has  been  discovered  to  the  effect  that  a  distinction,  as  to  whether 


810  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [III.iv.52 

the  resulting  enlightenment  will  occur  in  this  life  or  a  subsequent 
one,  is  created  by  the  relative  assiduousness  in  the  pursuit  of 
the  practices.  Now  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  there  is  any 
such  rule  applicable  to  the  aspirants  individually  that  a  distinc¬ 
tion  will  be  created  in  the  resulting  liberation  as  well  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  superiority  or  the  inferiority  of  the  knowledge 
itself. 

Vedantin :  Having  that  doubt  in  view  the  aphorist  answers: 

^  IIX3II 

There  is  no  rule  with  regard  to  the  result 
called  liberation  of  this  kind,  ^-sr^TT-ara^:  because  that 
state  has  been  definitely  ascertained  (to  be  the  same). 

52.  There  is  no  rule  of  this  kind  •with  regard  to  the  result 
called  liberation ,  because  that  state  has  been  definitely  deter - 
mined  (to  be  the  sa?ne),  because  that  state  has  been  definitely 
determined  (to  be  the  same). 

With  regard  to  liberation,  the  result  of  knowledge,  there  is 
no  such  rule.  One  must  not  entertain  any  misconception  of  any 
such  rule  being  applicable  with  individual  variation  in  the  matter 
of  the  resulting  liberation. 

Why? 

“Because  the  Upani$ads  have  definitely  ascertained  that  state 
(to  be  the  same)”.  For  in  all  the  Upani$ads,  the  state  of  liberation 
is  determined  to  be  uniform  in  nature,  the  state  of  liberation 
being  nothing  but  Brahman  Itself.  And  Brahman  cannot  be  of 
many  sorts,  since  Its  characteristic  indication  is  declared  to  be 
uniform  by  such  texts  as,  “neither  gross  nor  minute”  (Bj\  III. 
viii.  8),  “This  Self  is -that  which  has  been  described  as  ‘Not  so, 
not  so’”  (Bj\  III.  ix.  26),  “Where  one  does  not  see  anything 
else”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1),  “All  that  is  in  front  is  but  Brahman,  the 
immortal”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11),  “and  all  this  are  the  Self”  (Bf  II. 
iv.  6),  “That  great  birthless  Self  is  undecaying,  immortal, 
undying,  fearless,  and  Brahman  (infinite)”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  25), 
“But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman  everything  has  become 
the  Self,  then  what  should  one  see  and  through  what?”  (Bj\ 


III. iv.52]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA  811 

IV.  v.  15).  Moreover,  in  accordance  with  some  peculiar  efficacy 
belonging  to  the  means  of  knowledge,  they  may  (possibly) 
impart  some  excellence  to  knowledge  itself,  which  is  their 
result;  but  they  cannot  do  so  to  liberation  which  is  the  result 
of  knowledge.  For  we  said  it  more  than  once  that  liberation 
cannot  be  a  product  of  anything,  it  being  realized  through 
knowledge  as  a  fact  eternally  present  in  its  own  right.  For  the 
matter  of  that,  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  superiority 
constituted  by  perfection,  even  in  the  case  of  knowledge,  since 
an  inferior  knowledge  is  no  knowledge,  the  superior  one  alone 
being  so.  Hence  knowledge  can  possibly  have  only  such  a 
distinction  as  having  arisen  late  or  promptly.  But  in  liberation 
there  can  be  no  superiority.  Again,  unlike  the  differences  in  the 
results  of  karma,  the  result  of  knowledge  can  have  no  difference 
owing  to  the  absence  of  any  difference  in  the  knowledge  itself. 
For  unlike  karma ,  knowledge  as  the  means  to  liberation  has  no 
difference.  But  so  far  as  the  meditations  on  the  qualified  Brahman 
are  concerned,  as  for  instance  in,  “He  who  is  identified  with  the 
mind  and  has  the  subtle  body  as  His  body”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2), 
they  can  be  different,  owing  to  addition  or  elimination  of  attri¬ 
butes;  and  hence  there  can  be  a  difference  among  their  respective 
results,  even  as  in  the  case  of  the  results  of  karma.  In  support 
of  this  is  noticeable  an  indicatory  mark  in  the  text,  “The 
aspirant  becomes  just  as  he  meditates  on  Him.”  Similar  also  is 
the  Smjti  text,  “There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  higher  goal  for  one 
realizing  the  absolute  Brahman,  for  they  speak  of  difference 
only  in  cases  where  qualities  obtain”. 

The  repetition  of  “Because  that  state  has  been  definitely 
determined  (to  be  the  same)”  indicates  the  end  of  this  Part. 


Chapter  IV 


PH  ALA  — RESULT 
Section  I 

Topic  1:  Repetition  of  Meditation  etc. 

The  Third  Chapter  was  mostly  occupied  with  a  discussion  of 
the  practices  connected  with  the  conceptions  ( vidyas )  of  the 
qualified  Brahman  and  absolute  Brahman.  Now  this  Fourth 
will  be  concerned  with  a  discussion  about  the  results,  and  it  will 
also  consider  some  other  matters  stemming  out  of  that  subject. 
To  start  with,  however,  we  shall  follow  through  a  few  sections, 
some  special  considerations  regarding  the  practices  themselves. 

Doubt :  We  meet  with  such  Upani$adic  texts  as,  “The  Self, 
my  dear,  should  be  realized — should  be  heard  of,  reflected  on, 
and  meditated  upon”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  6),  “Knowing  about  this 
(Self)  alone,  the  intelligent  aspirant  after  Brahman  should  attain 
intuitive  knowledge”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  21),  “He  is  to  be  searched 
after,  He  is  to  be  desired  to  be  known”  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  and 
so  on.  The  doubt  arises  with  regard  to  these,  whether  the  mental 
act  is  to  be  undertaken  once  only,  or  it  is  to  be  repeated.  What 
should  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  Like  the  performance  of  the  Prayaja  sacrifice  etc. 
the  mental  act  is  to  be  undertaken  once  only;  for  the  require¬ 
ment  of  the  scripture  is  fulfilled  by  that  much  alone.  Were  one 
to  resort  to  repetition,  even  though  not  stated  by  the  Upani$ad, 
one  would  be  doing  something  not  envisaged  by  the  scripture. 

Doubt :  We  quoted  above  the  instructions  about  the  repeated 
mental  acts  as  contained  in,  “should  be  heard  of,  reflected  on, 
and  meditated  upon”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  6),  and  so  on. 

Opponent :  Even  so,  one  should  repeat  only  as  many  times  as 
the  scripture  demands.  There  should  be  one  hearing,  one  reflec¬ 
tion,  and  one  meditation,  and  nothing  more.  There  can  be  no 
repetition  where  the  instruction  is  uttered  but  once  with  a  “He 
should  know”  or  “He  should  meditate”. 


IV.  i.  1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  813 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  reply: 

\\%\\ 

Repetition  (is  necessary)  the  instruc¬ 

tion  having  been  given  more  than  once. 

1 .  Repetition  is  necessary ,  since  the  Upanifads  instruct 
repeatedly. 

The  mental  act  is  to  be  repeated. 

Why? 

Since  the  instruction  is  repeated.  Such  repeated  instruction  as 
“should  be  heard  of,  reflected  on,  and  meditated  upon”  indicates 
a  repetition  of  the  mental  act. 

Opponent :  Did  we  not  point  out  that  the  repetition  should 
be  as  many  times  as  the  scripture  demands  and  no  more? 

Vedantin :  No,  since  these  have  to  culminate  in  the  intuitive 
realization  of  Brahman;  for  hearing  etc.  fulfil  their  purpose  of 
producing  a  (tangible)  perceptible  result  in  this  case  when  they 
culminate  in  realization  through  repetition,  even  as  husking  etc. 
culminate  in  producing  rice  etc.  Besides,  by  the  word  updsand 
(continuous  remembrance,  adoration)  and  nididhy&sana  (pro¬ 
found  meditation)  are  implied  acts  involving  this  aspect  of  repe¬ 
tition.  It  is  thus  that  when  in  this  world  somebody  follows  his 
teacher  and  others  continuously  and  devotedly,  he  is  referred 
to  by  such  sentences  as,  “He  adores  his  teacher”,  “He  adores  the 
king”.  Similarly  by  the  sentence,  “The  woman  meditates  on 
her  husband  who  is  on  a  sojourn”,  a  woman  is  referred  to  who 
is  engaged  in  thinking  of  her  husband  constandy  and  is  anxious 
about  him.  The  verbs  vid  (lit.  to  know)  and  upas  (lit.  to  sit 
near  or  to  meditate)  are  seen  to  be  used  in  the  Upani$ads  inter¬ 
changeably.  Sometimes  the  text  starts  with  vid  and  ends  with 
upas ,  as  for  instance  in  the  context  starting  with,  “I  speak  of 
him  also  as  Raikva  who  knows  what  Raikva  knew  ( vedaY  (Ch. 
IV.  i.  4),  where  it  is  said  later,  “O  venerable  sir,  instruct  me 
about  the  God  on  whom  you  meditate  ( upasseY  (Ch.  IV. 
ii.  2).  Sometimes  again  the  start  is  made  with  meditation  and 
conclusion  with  knowledge,  as  in,  “One  should  meditate  on 
the  mind  as  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xviii.  1),  and  “He  who  knows 


814  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.i.l 

thus  becomes  resplendent  in  fame,  prowess,  and  the  brilliance 
arising  from  the  Vedic  studies”  (Ch.  III.  xviii.  3).  Hence  repeti¬ 
tion  has  to  be  resorted  to  even  where  the  instruction  occurs  only 
once,  while  a  repeated  instruction  indicates  repetition  as  a  matter 
of  course. 


IRII 

2.  And  (this  is  so)  on  account  of  the  indicatory  mark. 

The  indicatory  sign  also  conveys  the  idea  of  repetition.  Thus 
it  is  that  after  starting  with  the  meditation  on  the  Udgitha ,  the 
meditation  on  the  Udgitha  as  the  sun  is  decried  as  productive 
of  a  single  son.  Then  in  the  sentence,  “You  meditate  repeatedly 
on  the  Udgitha  (separately)  as  the  (sun  and  its)  rays”  (Ch.  I.  v. 
11),  the  text  prescribes  (by  the  term  paryavartaya — meditate 
repeatedly)  the  meditation  on  the  multiplicity  of  the  rays  for 
getting  many  sons.  Thereby  the  text  indicates  that  the  repetition 
of  the  mental  act  is  assumed  as  an  established  fact.  Hence  from  a 
similarity  of  this  it  follows  that  repetition  should  be  the  rule  in 
all  cases  of  mental  acts. 

The  opponent  says  here:  Granted  that  the  mental  acts  that 
are  productive  of  results  may  well  be  repeated  when  some 
excellence  can  be  produced  in  them  through  the  repetition. 
But  what  purpose  can  be  served  by  the  repetition  where  a 
(single)  mental  act  about  the  supreme  Brahman  calls  up  the 
supreme  Brahman  which  is  eternally  pure,  intelligent,  and  free 
by  nature,  and  which  is  identical  with  one’s  own  Self? 

Objection :  Repetition  has  to  be  undertaken,  since  the  realiza¬ 
tion  of  the  identity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self  does  not  reasonably 
result  from  a  single  hearing. 

Opponent :  No,  since  that  will  not  logically  follow  even  after 
repetition.  If  the  hearing  of  such  texts  as  “That  thou  art”  (Ch. 
VI.  viii.  7)  once  only  does  not  generate  the  realization  of  the 
identity  of  Brahman  and  the  Self,  then  how  can  it  be  expected 
that  even  a  repetition  of  that  will  produce  it?  Again  it  may  be 
argued  that  a  mere  sentence  cannot  produce  the  direct  percep¬ 
tion  of  anything,  and  hence  that  sentence,  helped  by  reasoning, 
will  produce  the  realization  of  the  identity  of  Brahman  and  the 


IV. i.  2]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  815 

Self.  But  (even  so),  this  reasoning  also  may  well  lead  to  a  per¬ 
ception  of  its  object  after  a  single  application. 

( Objection )  :  It  may  also  be  argued  that  reasoning  and  the 
text  can  only  produce  a  knowledge  of  the  general  features  of 
the  object,  but  not  so  of  its  special  features.  From  such  a  declara¬ 
tion  as,  “I  have  a  pain  in  the  heart”,  and  from  such  symptoms 
as  the  contortion  of  the  body,  another  person  can  understand 
in  a  general  way  that  there  is  a  pain,  but  he  cannot  have  a  full 
experience  of  the  pain  like  the  suffering  man.  Since  an  intimate 
knowledge  (of  this  nature)  leads  to  the  removal  of  ignorance, 
the  repetition  is  needed  for  that  purpose. 

Opponent :  This  cannot  be  so,  since  the  intimate  knowledge 
cannot  possibly  arise  even  if  that  much  is  done  repeatedly.  For 
a  special  aspect  that  cannot  be  known  from  the  scripture  and 
reasoning  at  the  first  instance,  cannot  be  known  even  after 
resorting  to  them  a  hundred  times.  So  whether  it  be  the  intimate 
knowledge  or  the  general  knowledge  that  is  produced  by  scrip¬ 
ture  and  reasoning,  it  must  be  so  at  the  very  first  application,  so 
that  repetition  has  no  place.  And  there  can  be  no  such  rule  that 
nobody  can  have  any  intimate  knowledge  at  the  very  first 
instant,  since  people  who  would  know  have  divergent  intelli¬ 
gence.  Again  with  regard  to  a  thing  of  this  world,  possessing 
common  and  peculiar  features,  there  may  be  scope  for  repetition 
inasmuch  as  a  man  may  understand  only  one  feature  at  one 
attempt  and  others  at  subsequent  attempts,  as  for  instance  in 
reading  a  long  chapter.  But  it  is  not  reasonable  that  there  should 
be  any  need  of  repetition  for  comprehending  Brahman  which 
is  absolute  Consciousness  without  common  and  peculiar  features. 

To  this  we  ( Vedantins )  say:  Repetition  will  be  unnecessary 
for  one  who  can  realize  the  Self  as  Brahman  after  hearing  “That 
thou  art”  once  only.  But  for  one  who  cannot  do  so,  repetition 
is  a  necessity.  Thus  it  is  noticed  in  the  Chandogya  Upanisad  that 
Uddalaka  teaches  his  son,  “That  thou  art,  O  Svetaketu”  (Ch. 
VI.  viii.  7),  and  then  being  requested  by  his  son  again  and 
again,  “O  revered  sir,  explain  to  me  again”  (ibid.),  he  removes 
the  respective  causes  of  his  (Svetaketu’s)  misconceptions,  and 
teaches  that  very  fact  “That  thou  art”  repeatedly.  That  very 


816  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  i.  2 

process  is  referred  to  by  citing  the  text,  “It  is  to  be  heard  of, 
reflected  on,  and  meditated  upon”  (Bj\  IV.  v.  6). 

Opponent :  Was  it  not  stated  that  if  the  text  “That  thou  art”, 
uttered  once,  cannot  bring  about  a  realization  of  its  meaning, 
then  it  will  not  be  able  to  do  so  even  when  repeated? 

Vedantin :  That  difficulty  does  not  arise,  for  nothing  is  illog¬ 
ical  about  facts  directly  perceived.  It  is  a  matter  of  experience 
that  though  the  meaning  may  be  vaguely  apprehended  from  a 
sentence  uttered  only  once,  people  understand  it  fully  after 
removing  progressively  the  false  ideas  standing  in  the  way, 
through  a  process  of  sustained  consideration.  Again,  the  text 
“That  thou  art”  speaks  of  the  identity  of  the  entity  denoted 
by  “thou”  with  the  entity  denoted  by  “That”.  By  the  word 
“That”  is  denoted  the  Brahman  under  discussion  that  is  Exist¬ 
ence,  the  Witness,  and  the  cause  of  the  birth  etc.  of  the  universe 
as  is  well  in  evidence  in  such  texts  as,  “Brahman  is  Truth, 
Knowledge,  and  Infinite”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  “Knowledge,  Bliss, 
Brahman”  (Bj*.  III.  ix.  28),  “This  Immutable  is  never  seen,  but 
is  the  Witness,  It  is  never  known,  but  is  the  Knower”  (Bf.  III. 
viii.  11),  “Without  birth,  decrepitude,  death”,  “Neither  gross 
nor  minute,  neither  short  nor  long”  (Bf.  III.  viii.  8),  and  so  on. 
In  these  texts,  changes  like  birth  etc.  that  befall  all  things  are 
denied  by  the  words,  “without  birth”  etc.  and  the  properties 
of  matter  like  grossness  etc.  are  denied  by  the  words  “neither 
gross”  etc.  By  the  words  “knowledge”  etc.  it  is  stated  that 
Brahman  is  by  nature  Consciousness  and  Effiulgence.  This 
object  called  Brahman,  which  is  denoted  by  the  word  “That”, 
which  is  free  from  all  mundane  attributes,  and  which  is 
by  nature  Consciousness,  is  well  known  to  the  people  who 
are  adepts  in  the  Upani$ads.  Equally  well  it  has  been  known 
by  them  that  the  inmost  Self  of  the  taught  (i.e.  disciple)  is 
the  meaning  of  the  word  “thou”,  which  is  the  seer  and  the 
hearer,  and  which  is  thought  of  as  the  inmost  entity  inhabit¬ 
ing  the  sheaths  starting  from  the  gross  body,  and  which  is 
then  ascertained  as  Consciousness  Itself.  That  being  the  case, 
the  sentence  “That  thou  art”  cannot  produce  a  direct  realization 
of  its  own  meaning  in  those  people  to  whom  these  two  entities 
remain  obstructed  by  ignorance,  doubt,  and  confusion;  for  the 


IV.  i.  2]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  817 

meaning  of  a  sentence  is  dependent  on  the  meaning  of  the  words 
(constituting  it).  Thus  it  is  that  for  such  people  it  becomes 
desirable  to  resort  repeatedly  to  the  scriptures  and  reasoning 
that  lead  to  a  clarification  of  the  concepts.  Although  the  Self 
to  be  realized  is  partless,  still  many  constituents  are  superimposed 
on  It,  such  as  the  body,  sense-organs,  mind,  intellect,  perception 
of  objects,  etc.  That  being  so,  one  false  constituent  may  be 
discarded  at  one  attempt  at  comprehension,  and  another  at 
another.  In  this  sense  the  dawn  of  a  conception  in  a  progressive 
manner  becomes  justifiable.  But  even  this  is  only  the  penultimate 
stage  of  the  realization  of  the  Self.  Those  of  sharp  intellect  on 
the  other  hand  who  have  no  obstruction  like  ignorance,  doubt, 
and  confusion,  with  regard  to  the  object  to  be  known  can 
realize  the  meaning  of  “That  thou  art”  even  from  the  first 
utterance,  so  that  a  repetition  in  their  case  is  certainly  useless. 
For  the  knowledge  of  the  Self  emerging  once  for  all  is  able  to 
remove  ignorance,  and  no  progressive  development  is  admitted 
here. 

Opponent :  This  may  be  proper  if  anybody  can  have  this 
realization  thus.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  however,  the  idea  that 
one  is  subject  to  sorrowfulness  etc.  is  strong,  so  that  nobody 
can  realize  the  absence  of  sorrowfulness  etc. 

Vedantin :  No,  since  the  reasonable  position  is  that  the  self- 
identification  with  misery  etc.  is  as  unreal  as  the  self-identifica¬ 
tion  with  the  body  etc.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  direct  experience 
that  when  the  body  is  cut  or  burned,  one  has  such  false  identifi¬ 
cation  as,  “I  am  being  cut”,  “I  am  being  burnt”.  Similarly  it  is 
seen  that  when  more  external  objects  like  sons  and  friends 
suffer,  one  superimposes  this  suffering  on  oneself  by  saying,  “I 
am  suffering”.  The  self-identification  with  misery  etc.  must  be 
similar,  since  like  the  body  etc.,  miserableness  etc.  are  perceived 
to  be  separate  from  consciousness.  Besides,  this  does  not  persist 
in  deep  sleep  etc.,  whereas  consciousness  is  present  even  in  sleep 
as  stated  in,  “That  It  does  not  see  in  that  state  is  because, 
although  seeing  then,  It  does  not  see”  (Bjr.  IV.  iii.  23).  Hence 
the  realization  of  the  Self  means  the  realization  that  “I  am  the 
Self  which  is  one  and  is  characterized  as  consciousness  and 
freedom  from  all  sorrow”.  A  man  who  realizes  the  Self  thus 


52 


818 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[IV.  i.  2 


can  have  no  other  duty.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Upanisadic  text 
shows  the  absence  of  any  duty  for  a  knower  of  the  Self  in, 
“What  shall  we  achieve  through  children,  we  who  have  attained 
this  Self,  this  result?”  (Bjr.  IV.  iv.  22).  The  Smj*ti  also  says,  “But 
the  man  who  is  devoted  to  the  Self  and  is  satisfied  with  the  Self 
and  content  in  the  Self  alone,  has  no  obligatory  duty7’  (Gita, 
III.  17).  But  to  one  to  whom  this  realization  does  not  come 
promptly,  this  very  repetition  is  meant  for  bringing  about  the 
realization.  Even  there,  however,  the  teacher  should  not  distract 
him  from  the  understanding  of  the  sentence  “That  thou  art”  in 
order  to  direct  him  to  mere  repetition;  for  nobody  marries  his 
daughter  to  a  bridegroom  for  killing  him.  So-  long  as  a  man 
acts  under  direction,  he  must  have  such  ideas  opposed  to  the 
ideas  of  Brahman  as,  “I  am  qualified  for  this,  I  am  the  agent  of 
action,  and  I  have  to  do  this”.  For  the  man  who  is  dull  of 
intellect  and  discards  the  meaning  of  a  sentence  just  because  it 
is  not  obvious  to  him,  it  is  admitted  that  his  mind  has  to  be 
fixed  on  the  meaning  of  that  sentence  through  the  process  of 
repetition  etc.  as  stated  (above).  Hence  even  in  the  case  of  the 
knowledge  of  the  supreme  Brahman,  a  repetition  of  the  instruc¬ 
tions,  leading  to  that  knowledge,  is  necessary. 

Topic  2:  Identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman 

3ir3fci  ^  11311 

%  But  (the  Upani$ads)  acknowledge  (Brahman) 

^5%  as  3TTr*rT  the  Self  ^  and  iiijPTfcr  make  (others)  understand 
{It  as  such). 

3.  But  the  Upanisads  acknowledge  Brahman  as  the  Self  and 
cause  It  to  be  so  understood . 

The  aphorist  discusses  whether  the  supreme  Self  which  is 
possessed  of  the  characteristics  as  presented  in  the  scriptures  is 
to  be  realized  as  identical  with  oneself  or  different  from  oneself. 

Opponent :  When  the  word  Self  is  heard  of  in  the  Upanisads 
as  referring  to  the  innermost  Self,  why  should  any  such  doubt 
arise? 


IV.  i.  3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  819 

Doubt :  The  answer  is  this:  This  word  “Self”  can  be  taken 
in  its  primary  sense  only  if  the  Self  and  God  be  non-different; 
otherwise  it  has  to  be  understood  in  a  secondary  sense.  That  is 
how  the  aphorist  thinks.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  It  is  to  be  understood  as  different  from  T  (one¬ 
self).  For  the  entity,  possessed  of  such  qualities  as  not  being 
blemished  by  sin  and  so  on,  cannot  be  understood  to  be  possessed 
of  the  opposite  qualities;  and  the  entity,  possessed  of  the  opposite 
qualities,  cannot  be  understood  to  be  possessed  of  the  qualities 
of  not  being  blemished  by  sin  and  so  on.  The  entity,  possessed 
of  the  attributes  of  being  free  from  sin  and  so  on,  is  the  supreme 
Lord,  while  the  entity,  possessed  of  the  opposite  attributes,  is 
the  embodied  soul.  Now,  if  God  becomes  identical  with  the 
transmigrating  soul,  God  will  cease  to  exist;  and  as  a  result, 
the  scriptures  will  become  useless.  Similarly  if  the  transmigrating 
soul  becomes  God,  there  will  be  none  to  follow  the  scriptures, 
which  will  certainly  become  useless.  This  will  also  contradict 
such  means  of  proof  as  common  experience. 

Objection :  Even  though  there  be  difference,  one  has  to  resort 
to  the  idea  of  identity  on  the  authority  of  the  scriptures,  just  as 
one  has  to  think  of  Vi$nu  in  images  etc. 

Opponent :  This  may  well  be  so  if  it  pleases  you;  but  then 
you  must  not  lead  us  to  admit  that  God  is  the  Self  of  the 
transmigrating  being  in  the  primary  sense. 

To  this  we  ( Vedantins )  say  that  the  supreme  Lord  is  of  course 
to  be  realized  as  one’s  Self.  Thus  it  is  that  the  Jabalas,  while 
speaking  of  the  supreme  Lord,  present  Him  as  identical  with 
the  Self  in,  “O  blessed  Deity,  I  indeed  am  Thee,  and  Thou 
indeed  art  me,  O  Deity”.  Similarly  also  the  other  texts  like  “I 
am  Brahman”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  10)  are  to  be  understood  as  postulating 
the  identity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  the 
Vedic  texts  make  us  understand  God  as  our  very  Self,  as  for 
instance,  “This  is  your  Self  that  is  within  all”  (Br.  III.  iv.  1), 
“This  is  the  internal  Ruler,  your  own  immortal  Self’  (Bj\  III.  vii. 
3),  “That  is  Truth,  that  is  the  Self,  and  That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI. 
viii.  7). 

As  for  the  argument  that  on  the  analogy  of  an  image  being 
Vi$ttu,  this  is  only  a  meditation  with  the  help  of  an  image 


820  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  i.  $ 

(which  in  this  case  is  “I”),  that  is  improper,  since  that  would 
amount  to  a  figurative  interpretation  (of  the  texts  about  unity). 
It  is  also  improper  because  the  syntactical  forms  of  the  passages 
are  different.  Where  the  intention  is  that  a  symbol  should  have 
an  idea  superimposed  on  it,  a  sentence  occurs  only  unilaterally, 
as  for  instance,  “The  mind  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xviii.  1),  “The 
sun  is  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1).  But  here  the  Upani$ad  says, 
“I  am  Thee,  and  Thou  art  me”.  Hence  identity  is  to  be  under¬ 
stood  from  this  kind  of  texts  that  are  dissimilar  to  those  dealing 
with  symbols.  Moreover,  the  dualistic  conception  is  condemned, 
as  in,  “While  he  who  worships  another  God  thinking,  ‘He  is 
one,  and  I  am  another’,  does  not  know”  (Bj\  I.  iv.  10),  “He 
goes  from  death  to  death  who  sees  difference  as  it  were  in  It” 
(Bj\  IV.  iv.  19),  “All  ousts  one  who  knows  it  as  different  from 
the  Self”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  7);  and  there  are  many  other  Upani$adic 
texts  of  this  kind  which  denounce  the  dualistic  conceptions. 

It  was  argued  that  the  two  things  of  opposite  characteristics 
cannot  be  identical  with  each  other.  That  is  nothing  damaging 
as  the  reasonable  position  is  that  the  opposition  in  characteristics 
is  unreal. 

And  it  is  a  false  argument  that  God  will  cease  to  be  so, 
because  one  has  to  accept  scriptural  authority  and  because  such  a 
position  is  not  held  by  us.  For  we  do  not  admit  that  the  scrip¬ 
tures  speak  of  God  Himself  as  the  transmigrating  soul. 

What  do  you  admit  then? 

We  hold  that  the  scriptures  aim  at  establishing  the  identity 
of  the  transmigrating  soul  with  God  Himself  by  removing  from 
the  soul  all  vestiges  of  transmigration.  From  this  point  of  view 
it  becomes  affirmed  that  God  is  possessed  of  the  characteristics 
of  being  untouched  by  sins  etc.,  and  that  the  opposite  charac¬ 
teristics  of  the  soul  are  unreal. 

The  criticism  is  also  unfounded  that  no  one  will  be  left  over 
to  practise  the  Vedantic  path  and  that  direct  perception  etc.  will 
be  outraged.  For  the  transmigratory  state  is  conceded  before 
enlightenment,  and  the  activities  like  perception  are  confined 
within  that  state  only,  because  texts  as  this,  “But  when  to  the 
knower  of  Brahman  everything  has  become  the  Self,  then  what 


IV.  i.  4]  BRAHMA -SOTRA-BHASYA  821 

should  one  see  and  through  what?”  (Bf.  II.  iv.  14),  point  out 
the  absence  of  perception  etc.  in  the  state  of  enlightenment. 

Opponent :  In  the  absence  of  perception  etc.  the  Vedas  also 
will  cease  to  exist. 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect,  since  that  position  is  admitted 
by  us.  For  according  to  the  texts  starting  with,  “In  this  state  the 
father  is  no  father”  and  ending  with  “The  Vedas  are  no  Vedas” 
(Bj*.  IV.  iii.  22),  we  do  admit  the  absence  of  the  Vedas  them¬ 
selves  in  the  state  of  enlightenment. 

Opponent :  Who  is  it  then  that  has  this  unenlightenment? 

Vedantin  :  We  say  that  it  is  you  yourself  who  ask  thus. 

Opponent :  Is  it  not  stated  by  the  Upani$ad  that  I  am  God? 

Vedantin :  If  that  is  so,  you  are  already  an  enlightened  man, 
and  so  nobody  has  unenlightenment.  Hereby  is  also  refuted  the 
criticism  of  some  people  who  say  that  the  Self  becomes  asso¬ 
ciated  with  a  second  entity  owing  to  the  very  presence  of 
nescience,  so  that  non-dualism  becomes  untenable.1  Hence  one 
should  fix  one’s  mind  on  the  Self  which  is  God. 

Topic  3:  No  Self-identity  with  Symbols 

Doubt :  Some  meditations  based  on  symbols  are  presented  thus: 
“One  should  meditate  about  the  mind  as  Brahman.  This  is  on 
the  corporeal  plane.  Then  is  the  meditation  on  the  material  plane. 
One  should  meditate  about  space  as  Brahman”  (Ch.  III.  xviii.  1); 
similarly,  “The  sun  is  Brahman.  This  is  the  instruction”  (Ch. 
III.  xix.  1),  “He  who  meditates  about  name  as  Brahman”  (Ch. 
VII.  i.  5).  With  regard  to  these  meditations  with  the  help  of 
symbols  the  doubt  arises  whether  self-identification  should  be 
resorted  to  or  not  even  in  these  cases.  What  should  be  the  solu¬ 
tion  here? 

Opponent :  It  is  logical  that  one  should  identify  oneself  with 
those  symbols  as  well  (thinking  thus:  “I  am  the  symbol  which 
is  Brahman”). 

Why? 

Because  Brahman  is  familiar  in  the  Upani$ads  as  the  Self  and 

1  Nescience  is  indeterminate  and  hence  ceases  to  exist  on  the  rise  of 
enlightenment. 


822  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  i.  4 

the  symbols  also  are  forms  of  Brahman. -Since  these  symbols  are 
modifications  of  Brahman  and  are  hence  Brahman  Itself,  there¬ 
fore  it  is  but  reasonable  that  they  should  be  the  Self  (of  all). 

To  this  we  (the  Veddntms)  say: 

m  imi 

?T  Not  (self-identification)  in  the  symbol  f|  because 

*T:  he  (the  aspirant)  ^  (does)  not  (comprehend  thus). 

4.  (The  aspirant  is)  not  to  identify  (himself)  with  a  symbol , 
for  he  cannot  understand  himself  to  be  so. 

One  should  not  fix  the  idea  of  the  Self  on  symbols,  because 
an  aspirant  cannot  think  of  the  separate  symbols  as  himself.  The 
reasoning  is  hollow  that  the  symbols  being  forms  of  Brahman 
are  Brahman  Itself,  and  hence  are  the  same  as  the  Self;  for  that 
would  lead  to  the  brushing  away  of  all  symbols.  For  it  is  only 
when  the  names  etc.  are  deprived  of  their  transformed  states  (as 
names  etc.),  that  one  arrives  at  Brahman  which  is  their  essence. 
But  when  names  etc.  as  such  are  done  away  with,  how  can  they 
become  symbols  and  how  can  there  be  any  self-identification? 
It  cannot  also  be  argued  that  since  Brahman  is  the  Self,  we  can 
have  a  meditation  involving  self-identification  wherever  an 
injunction  about  contemplation  on  Brahman  occurs;  for  (in 
meditation)  the  idea  of  agentship  still  remains  intact.  Brahman  is 
taught  to  be  identical  with  the  individual  Self  after  eliminating 
all  mundane  characteristics  like  agentship  etc.  from  the  latter, 
whereas  meditation  is  prescribed  without  eliminating  these.  From 
this  fact  also  that  the  aspirant  and  the  symbols  are  equally  limited 
entities,  self-identity  (with  symbols)  is  not  a  possibility;  for  a 
rucaka  and  a  svastika ,  (which  .are  both  different  kinds  of  gold 
ornaments),  cannot  be  identical.  But  should  the  aspirant  and 
the  symbols  be  the  same  from  the  point  of  view  of  their 
Brahmanhood,  just  as  much  as  the  two  ornaments  are  from  the 
standpoint  of  being  gold,  then  we  have  already  showed  the 
difficulty  that  the  symbols  will  cease  to  exist  (as  such).  Hence 
one  is  not  to  identify  oneself  with  a  symbol. 


IV.  i.  5]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  823 

Topic  4:  Superimposition  of  the  Higher  on  the  Lower 


With  regard  to  those  very  instances  another  doubt  arises. 
Should  the  ideas  of  the  sun  etc.  be  superimposed  on  Brahman 
or  should  the  idea  of  Brahman  be  superimposed  on  the  sun  etc.? 

Why  should  the  doubt  arise? 

Because  no  reason  is  discernible  for  these  being  placed  in 
apposition  (with  the  same  case-endings).  Here  we  find  the  word 
Brahman  placed  in  apposition  with  the  words  sun  etc.,  the  same 
case-endings  being  used  in  the  texts,  “ Adityo  brahma ”,  “ Prdno 
brahma”,  “Vidyud  brahma ”,  and  so  on.  But  this  apposition  does 
not  quite  fit  in  here  on  account  of  the  divergent  meanings  of 
the  words  adit y a  (sun),  brahma  (Brahman),  etc.  For  there  can 
be  no  such  apposition  (between  a  cow  and  a  horse)  as  would  be 
implied  in  “The  cow  is  horse  (i.e.  the  cow  that  is  a  horse)”. 

Objection  :  Just  as  clay  and  a  plate  (made  of  clay)  can  be 
placed  in  apposition  (the  latter  being  a  modification  of  the 
former),  so  also  can  be  placed  Brahman  and  the  sun  etc.,  they 
being  related  as  the  material  cause  and  its  modifications. 

Doubt :  The  answer  is  that  it  cannot  be  so,  since  from  such 
an  apposition  (meaning  identity)  with  the  material  cause,  the 
modified  thing  will  lose  its  individuality,  and  that  will  lead  to 
an  elimination  of  symbols,  as  already  pointed  out.  Moreover,  in 
that  case,  this  will  amount  to  a  mere  statement  about  the  supreme 
Self,  so  that  the  scope  for  meditation  will  be  effaced,  and  the 
mention  in  the  Upani$ad  of  a  limited  (i.e.  selected)  number  of 
modifications  (of  Brahman)  will  be  meaningless.  Hence  it  is  a 
case  of  superimposing  the  idea  of  one  thing  on  another,  as 
in  sentences  like  “The  Brahmana  is  the  VaiSvanara  fire”.  That 
being  so,  the  doubt  arises  as  to  what  is  to  be  looked  upon  as 
what. 

Opponent :  Such  being  the  case,  there  can  be  no  definite  deci¬ 
sion,  because  no  scriptural  text  is  in  evidence  to  help  a  decision. 
This  is  how  it  has  to  be  accepted.  Or  we  can  rather  decide  that 
the  very  ideas  of  the  sun  etc.  are  to  be  superimposed  on 
Brahman;  for  it  is  thus  that  Brahman  becomes  adored  (i.e.  medi¬ 
tated  upon)  by  being  looked  upon  as  the  sun  and  the  rest;  and 
the  conclusion  of  the  scripture  is  that  the  worship  of  Brahman 


824  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  IV.  i.  5 

is  productive  of  fruits.  Hence  the  sun  and  the  rest  are  not  to  be 
looked  upon  as  Brahman  (but  rather  Brahman  is  to  be  looked 
upon  as  these). 

Vedctntin :  This  being  the  conclusion,  we  say: 

IIHII 

(The  sun  etc.  are  to  have)  the  idea  of  Brahman 

superimposed  (on  them)  because  of  the  (consequent) 

exaltation. 

5.  The  sun  etc .  are  to  be  looked  upon  as  Brahman  because  of 
the  consequent  exaltation . 

The  idea  of  Brahman  Itself  is  to  be  superimposed  on  the  sun 
and  the  rest. 

Why? 

On  account  of  the  exaltation;  for  thus  the  sun  and  the  other 
things  will  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  raised  in  status,  because 
of  the  superimposition  on  them  of  an  exalted  idea.  Thus  also  will 
be  honoured  the  custom  in  ordinary  life,  according  to  which  the 
inferior  one  is  to  be  fancied  as  the  higher,  as  is  evident  in 
honouring  a  king’s  charioteer  as  the  long  himself.  For  it  will  not 
lead  to  any  good  result  if  the  king  be  lowered  in  estimation  by 
being  looked  upon  as  the  charioteer.  That  should  be  the  method 
of  approach  here  as  well,  for  a  contrary  approach  will  lead  to 
evil. 

Opponent :  No  possibility  of  evil  should  be  apprehended  here 
since  there  is  the  sanction  of  the  scripture;  and  the  scriptural 
views  are  not  to  be  regulated  by  common  norms. 

Vedantin :  To  this  the  answer  is  that  this  would  be  so  in  a  case 
where  the  meaning  can  be  ascertained;  but  when  the  meaning  of 
the  scripture  is  in  doubt,  it  is  nothing  unbecoming  to  take  the 
help  of  the  canons  of  ordinary  life  for  arriving  at  a  decision.  If  in 
accordance  with  this  the  scripture  is  ascertained  to  mean  the 
superimposition  of  the  exalted  status,  it  is  but  obvious  that  one 
will  merely  court  evil  by  superimposing  the  idea  of  the  lower 
on  the  higher.  Now,  because  the  words  sun  ( aditya )  etc.  occur 
first,  their  primary  meanings  have  to  be  accepted,  for  that  creates 


IV.  i.  5]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  825 

no  difficulty.  And  while  the  intellect  remains  occupied  with 
these  words  in  their  primary  senses,  the  word  Brahman  makes 
its  appearance  in  these  sentences  at  a  later  stage.  But  since  the 
word  Brahman,  in  its  primary  sense,  cannot  stand  in  apposition 
with  the  sun  etc.,  the  only  remaining  conclusion  that  stands 
affirmed  is  that  the  intention  here  is  to  prescribe  the  super¬ 
imposition  of  the  idea  of  Brahman.  Besides,  from  the  use  of  the 
word  iti  (meaning  “as”)  after  Brahman  (in  adit  yam  brahma  iti 
upasita),  this  very  meaning  becomes  appropriate.  Thus  it  is  that 
the  Upani$ad  everywhere  uses  the  word  Brahman  with  an  iti 
after  it  in  such  sentences  as,  “ Brahma  iti  ade'sdti\  uBrahma  iti 
upasita ”,  “ Brahma  iti  upaste ”2,  and  so  on,  while  the  words 
adit y a  (sun)  etc.  are  used  by  themselves.  From  this  it  follows 
that  as  in  the  sentence  ilSuktikam  rajatam  iti  pratyeti — He  per¬ 
ceives  the  nacre  as  silver”,  the  word  suktikd  (nacre)  denotes  the 
nacre  itself,  while  the  word  rajata  (silver)  denotes  an  appearance 
of  silver  by  a  figure  of  speech,  meaning  thereby  that  the  man 
has  merely  a  cognition  of  silver,  though  in  fact  there  is  no  silver, 
so  in  the  present  case  we  understand  that  one  has  to  look  upon 
the  sun  etc.  as  Brahman.  Again  by  using  the  accusative  case 
(after  dditya  etc.)  in  the  complementary  portion,  the  Upanisad 
shows  that  the  sun  etc.  are  the  objects  of  the  verb  “to  meditate”, 
as  in:  “He  who  having  known  thus  meditates  about  the  sun  as 
Brahman — sa  ya  evam  vidvdn  adit  yam  brahma  iti  upaste ”  (Ch. 
III.  xix.  4),  “He  who  meditates  about  the  organ  of  speech  as 
Brahman — yo  vacam  brahma  iti  upaste ”  (Ch.  VII.  ii.  2),  “He 
who  meditates  about  resolve  as  Brahman — yah  saiikalpcmi 
brahma  iti  upaste ”  (Ch.  VII.  iv.  3). 

As  for  the  assertion  that  the  meditation  on  Brahman  Itself  is 
to  be  preferred  here  for  the  sake  of  acquiring  the  result,  that  is 
untenable,  since  according  to  the  above  reasoning,  the  sun  etc. 
are  themselves  known  as  the  objects  of  meditation.  But  the  result 
will  of  course  be  ordained  by  Brahman  in  these  cases  just  as 
much  as  in  the  cases  of  the  service  to  the  guests  and  so  on,  for 
Brahman  is  the  ordainer  of  everything.  This  fact  was  elaborated 

2 “The  instruction  is,  ‘It  is  as  Brahman’”,  “It  should  be  meditated  on 
as  Brahman”,  “He  who  meditates  as  Brahman”. 


826  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  i.  5 

under  the  aphorism,  “From  Him  are  the  fruits  of  action,  since 
that  is  reasonable”  (III.  ii.  38).  The  very  fact  that  the  idea  of 
Brahman  is  superimposed  on  the  symbols  is  a  worship  of 
Brahman,  just  as  much  as  the  imagination  of  the  images  as  Vi$nu 
and  others  is  the  worship  of  those  deities. 

Topic  5:  Subordinate  Parts  of  Rites  as  the  Sun  etc. 

Doubt :  Certain  meditations  occur  in  connection  with  the 
auxiliaries  of  rites  as  found  in  such  texts  as,  “Meditate  on  the 
sun,  that  shines  yonder,  as  Udgitha ”  (Ch.  I.  iii.  1),  “Meditate  on 
the  worlds  as  the  fivefold  Sama ”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  1),  “Meditate  on 
speech  as  the  sevenfold  Sama ”  (Ch.  II.  viii.  1),  “This  (earth) 
indeed  is  Rk,  fire  is  Sama ”  (Ch.  I  vi.  1),  and  others.  With  regard 
to  these  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  ideas  of  Udgitha  etc. 
are  to  be  superimposed  on  the  sun  etc.  or  the  Udgitha  etc.  are 
to  be  viewed  as  the  sun  etc. 

Opponent :  The  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at  here  is  that  either 
of  the  two  things  can  be  done  indiscriminately,  since  nothing 
occurs  there  to  decide  in  favour  of  either  of  them.  No  one  is 
understood  here  as  having  any  special  exaltation  like  Brahman. 
It  is  possible  to  understand  that  Brahman  is  more  glorified  than 
the  sun  etc.,  It  being  the  origin  of  the  whole  universe  and 
possessed  of  the  attributes  of  being  free  from  sin  etc.  But  since 
the  sun,  the  Udgitha,  and  other  things  are  all  equally  the  modi¬ 
fications  of  Brahman,  nothing  can  be  understood  (in  those 
contexts)  as  elevating  any  one  of  them  above  the  rest. 

Or  it  may  be  that  the  ideas  of  the  Udgitha  etc.  are  ever  to  be 
superimposed  on  the  sun  etc. 

Why? 

Because  Udgitha  etc.  constitute  the  rites,  and  because  the  rites 
are  well  known  as  meant  for  yielding  results.  The  sun  etc.,  when 
meditated  on  by  viewing  them  as  the  Udgitha  etc.  will  become 
part  and  parcel  of  the  rites  and  will  thus  produce  their  results 
(as  a  part  of  the  results  of  the  rites  themselves).  Thus  it  is  that 
in  the  text  starting  with,  “This  (earth)  indeed  is  Rk,  fire  is 
Sama ”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  1),  the  earth  is  alluded  to  by  the  word  Rk,  and 
fire  by  the  word  Sama  in,  “That  Sama  is  established  on  this  Rk” 
(ibid).  This  becomes  consistent  if  the  earth  and  fire  are  sought 


IV.  i.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  827 

to  be  looked  upon  as  Rk  and  Santa,  but  not  so  if  Rk  and  Soma 
are  intended  to  be  viewed  as  the  earth  and  fire  (respectively). 
The  word  king  comes  to  bear  a  figurative  sense  when  it  is 
applied  to  his  charioteer,  but  the  word  charioteer  is  not  thus 
applied  to  the  king.  Moreover,  from  the  sentence,  “Meditate  on 
the  fivefold  Sdma  (as  existing)  among  the  worlds  ( lokesu )” 
(Ch.  II.  ii.  1),  it  is  obvious  that  the  Sama  is  to  be  superimposed 
on  the  worlds  as  they  are  pointed  out  to  be  the  locus  (by  the 
use  of  the  locative  case-ending — in  loke$u — after  worlds);  The 
text,  “This  Gay  am  Soma  is  established  among  the  pranas”  (Ch. 
II.  xi.  1)  only  confirms  this  view.  In  such  sentences  as,  “The 
sun  is  Brahman — this  is  the  instruction”  (Ch.  III.  xix.  1),  the 
idea  of  Brahman,  coming  later,  is  superimposed  on  the  sun  etc. 
occurring  earlier.  And  in  such  Upani$adic  texts  as,  “The  earth 
is  hifikdra”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  1),  the  earth  etc.  occur  earlier,  while 
hiitkdra  etc.  occur  later.  Hence  the  ideas  of  the  auxiliaries  of 
the  rites  are  to  be  superimposed  on  the  sun  etc.  which  are  non¬ 
auxiliaries. 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  reply: 


gqqvi:  ll^ll 


^  And  the  ideas  of  the  sun  etc.  (are  to  be 

superimposed)  3T|f  on  the  subsidiary  part  (of  rite)  gqw:  for 
that  is  reasonable. 


6.  And  the  ideas  of  the  sun  etc .  are  surely  to  be  superimposed 
on  the  subsidiary  parts  of  the  rites ,  for  that  is  reasonably  main¬ 
tainable. 


The  ideas  of  the  sun  etc.  are  of  course  to  be  superimposed 
on  such  subsidiaries  as  Udgitha  etc. 

Why? 

On  account  of  reasonableness.  For  it  is  but  reasonable  that 
when  Udgitha  etc.  become  sanctified  by  being  looked  upon  as 
the  sun  etc.,  the  rites  become  more  fruitful.  This  is  owing  to 
the  proximity  of  (parts  like)  Udgitha 3  to  the  unseen  poten- 

3  Udgitha ,  sanctified  by  being  looked  upon  as  the  sun,  leads  to  a  better 
result,  but  the  sun,  looked  upon  as  the  former  cannot  do  so;  the  sun  is 
not  a  part  of  the  rite. 


828  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  [IV.  i.  6 

rial  results  of  the  rites.  The  text,  “Whatever  is  done  with 
knowledge,  faith,  and  meditation  becomes  more  fruitful”  (Ch. 

I.  i.  10)  shows  that  knowledge  leads  to  an  enhancement  of  the 
potency  of  the  rites. 

Opponent :  This  may  be  so  in  the  cases  of  those  meditations 
which  are  calculated  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  the  rites.  But 
what  about  those  meditations  that  have  independent  results  as 
mentioned  in  the  texts  beginning  with,  “He  who  having  known 
this  thus,  meditates  about  the  worlds  as  the  fivefold  Sama ”  (Ch. 

II.  ii.  3),  and  others? 

Vedantin :  Since  these  meditations  are  to  be  undertaken  by 
those  who  are  already  qualified  for  the  relevant  rites,  it  is  proper 
on  the  analogy  of  the  milking  pot4  to  assume  even  in  their  case 
that  the  result  emerges  in  association  with  the  result  of  the  rite 
in  question.  And  the  sun  etc.,  standing  for  the  results  of  the 
rites,  are  logically  more  elevated  than  the  Udgitha  etc.  consti¬ 
tuting  the  rites;  for  the  Upani$ads  mention  the  world  of  the 
sun  and  such  other  worlds  as  the  results  of  rites.  Besides,  the 
Udgitha  itself  is  presented  as  the  thing  to  be  meditated  on  in 
the  texts,  “Meditate  on  Udgitha  as  the  letter  Orri ’  (Ch.  I.  i.  1), 
“Up  to  this  is  explained  the  glory  of  the  letter  OnT  (Ch.  I.  i. 
10).  After  presenting  it  thus  as  the  entity  to  be  meditated  on, 
it  is  enjoined  that  it  should  be  viewed  as  the  sun  etc. 

The  argument  was  advanced  that  when  the  sun  etc.  are  medi¬ 
tated  upon  with  the  ideas  of  the  Udgitha  etc.  superimposed  on 
them,  they  will  become  constituents  of  an  act  and  will  thus 
produce  results.  That  is  untenable,  because  the  meditation  itself 
is  an  act  and  can  reasonably  produce  a  result.  Moreover,  the 
Udgitha  and  the  rest  do  not  cease  to  be  the  auxiliaries  of  rites 
even  when  viewed  as  the  sun  and  other  things.  In  the  portion 
of  the  text,  “On  this  Rk  is  established  this  Sama ”5  (Ch.  I.  vi.  1), 

4  A  sacrificer  who  wants  cattle  should  bring  the  water  in  a  milking  pot 
when  he  is  already  engaged  in  some  specific  sacrifice.  This  getting  of 
cattle  is  not  an  independent  result,  nor  the  bringing  of  water  an  inde¬ 
pendent  act.  The  act  produces  its  result  in  association  with  the  result  of 
the  main  sacrifice.  So  also  here. 

*The  whole  passage  is:  “This  (earth)  itself  is  Rk ,  fire  is  Sama ;  thus 
on  this  Rk  is  established  Sama\  therefore  they  sing  the  Sama  as  established 
on  W  (Ch.  I.  vi.  1). 


829 


IV.  i.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 

it  is  only  in  a  figurative  sense  that  the  earth  and  fire  are  called 
Rk  and  Soma.  In  a  figurative  use  a  word  conveys  some  sense 
varying  as  far  as  possible  between  the  senses  proximate  to  and 
remote  from  its  primary  sense.  Now  in  that  passage  (“This 
indeed  is  Rk ,  fire  is  Sama ”  etc.),  although  the  intention  is  that 
the  Rk  and  SSma  should  be  viewed  as  the  earth  and  fire,  still  it 
is  definitely  understood  that  (in  the  portion  “On  this  Rk  is 
established  this  Sama ”)  the  words  Rk  and  Sama  are  used  to 
imply  the  earth  and  fire  themselves  because  these  latter  are 
connected  with  Rk  and  Sama.  This  is  so  understood  because  the 
well-known  Rk  and  Sama  are  spoken  of  separately  (in  “There¬ 
fore  they  sing  the  Soma  as  established  on  Rk”,  so  that  if  Rk  and 
Sama  be  meant  in  the  earlier  portion  “On  this  Rk  is  established 
this  S5ma”,  it  will  involve  a  repetition),  and  because  the  earth 
and  fire  occur  in  their  proximity  (in  the  still  earlier  first  portion 
“This  (earth)  indeed  is  Rk,  fire  is  Sama”).  Even  the  word 
charioteer  cannot  be  prevented  from  denoting  the  king  figura¬ 
tively  when  by  some  reason  it  can  come  near  enough  to  the 
king  (as  for  instance,  when  the  king  himself  drives  the  chariot). 
Moreover,  the  sentence,  “This  (earth)  itself  is  Rk — iyam  eva 
rk”  (Ch.  I.  vi.  1)  indicates  from  its  very  construction  that  the 
Rk  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  earth;  for  if  the  earth  were  to 
be  looked  upon  as  the  Rk,  the  form  of  the  sentence  would  have 
been,  “iyam  rk  eva — the  Rk,  itself  is  this”.  Besides,  the  text,  “He 
who  having  known  thus  sings  Sama”  (Ch.  I.  vii.  7),  only  con¬ 
cludes  a  meditation  based  on  an  auxiliary,  and  not  one  based  on 
the  earth.  Similarly  in  the  text,  “Meditate  on  the  fivefold  Sama 
(as  existing)  among  the  words”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  1),  though  the  word 
world  is  used  in  the  locative  case  ( lokepu ),  still  the  worlds  are 
to  be  superimposed  on  the  Sama,  since  the  word  Sama  is  used 
in  the  accusative  case,  thereby  indicating  that  it  is  the  object 
of  meditation.  For  Sama  becomes  meditated  on  as  the  worlds 
when  the  worlds  are  superimposed  on  it,  while  a  reversal  of 
this  leads  to  the  worlds  becoming  meditated  on  as  Sama*  Hereby 
(i.e.  on  the  ground  that  one  case-ending  alone  is  to  be  changed) 

6  The  opponent’s  explanation  involves  a  change  in  the  case-ending  of 
both;  ours  involves  a  single  change  (in  lokesn ,  but  not  in  sama). 


830 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[IV.  i.  6 


is  also  explained  the  text,  “This  Gdyatra  Sdma  is  fixed  on  the 
pranas ”  (Ch.  II.  xi.  1),  (where  Gdyatra  has  the  nominative  case 
and  prana  the  locative).  Where  two  words  are  used  equally  in 
the  accusative  case,  as  in  “ Atha  khalu  amum  aditycmi  sapta- 
vidham  sdma  upasita — Then  meditate  on  this  sevenfold  Sdma  as 
the  sun”  (Ch.  II.  itf.  1),  even  there  the  sun  is  to  be  superimposed 
on  the  Sdma ,  since  the  topic  that  is  started  with  is  the  meditation 
on  Sdma ,  as  is  evident  from,  “It  is  good  indeed  to  meditate  on 
the  Sdma  as  a  whole”  (Ch.  II.  i.  1),  “Here  ends  the  meditation 
on  the  fivefold  Sdma,  then  starts  that  on  the  sevenfold  Sdma” 
(Ch.  II.  viii.  1).  And  since  it  is  gathered  from  this  very  text  that 
the  Sdma  is  to  be  meditated  on,  the  idea  of  the  earth  etc.  are  to 
be  superimposed  on  hinkara  etc.  even  when  the  construction  of 
the  sentence  is  different,  as  in  “ prthivi  hinkdrah — the  earth  is 
hinkara”  (Ch.  II.  ii.  1).  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  the  ideas 
of  the  sun  etc.,  which  are  not  the  auxiliaries  of  rites,  are  to  be 
superimposed  on  the  Udgitha  etc.  which  are  the  auxiliaries  of 
rites. 


Topic  6:  Meditation  in  a  Sitting  Posture 

3n#r:  wan 

(Mental  adoration  is  to  be  pursued)  3tTfffcr:  while  in  a  sitting 
posture  qi^Tcirq  since  (it  is)  possible  (in  that  way  only). 

7.  One  should  adore  mentally  'while  having  a  sitting  posture , 
since  it  is  possible  in  that  *way  alone. 

The  consideration  about  the  requisite  posture  etc.  does  not 
arise  with  regard  to  the  mental  adoration  or  meditation 
(updsana)  connected  with  the  auxiliaries  of  rites,  since  that  is 
regulated  by  the  rites  themselves.  Again,  this  question  does  not 
crop  up  in  a  context  of  full  enlightenment  because  knowledge 
is  determined  by  the  reality  itself.  But  with  regard  to  other  kinds 
of  upasand  one  has  to  consider  whether  one  should  meditate  in 
a  sitting,  standing,  or  lying  posture  just  as  one  likes,  or  always 
in  a  sitting  posture. 

Opponent :  Now  since  an  upasana  is  a  mental  act,  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  that  there  can  be  no  rule  about  posture. 


IV.  i.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BH A§YA  831 

Vedantin  :  Hence  the  aphorist  says  that  one  should  adore 
(mentally)  in  a  sitting  posture  alone. 

Why? 

Since  it  is  possible  in  that  way  alone.  Upasana  consists  in 
setting  up  a  current  of  similar  thoughts;  and  that  is  not  possible 
for  one  while  walking  or  running,  because  movement  etc. 
disturb  the  mind.  Even  for  a  standing  man,  the  mind  remains 
busy  about  keeping  the  body  erect,  so  that  it  is  not  able  then 
to  look  into  subtle  things.  A  man  lying  on  the  ground  may 
suddenly  fall  asleep.  But  for  a  sitting  man,  innumerable  troubles 
of  this  kind  are  easy  to  avoid,  so  that  upasana  becomes  possible 
for  him. 


m  IFII 

8 .  And  because  of  (the  possibility  of)  concentration  (in  that 

<way). 

Moreover,  the  meaning  of  the  term  concentration  is  this, 
namely  the  setting  up  of  a  continuous  stream  of  similar  thoughts. 
The  verb  “to  concentrate”  is  applied  figuratively  to  one  having 
his  limbs  relaxed,  gaze  fixed,  and  mind  concentrated  on  a  single 
object,  as  in  such  sentences  as,  “The  heron  has  its  mind  con¬ 
centrated”,  “The  woman  who  has  her  lover  in  exile  has  her 
mind  fixed  (on  him)”.  This  proceeds  easily  for  one  in  a  sitting 
posture.  Hence  also  upasana  is  to  be  undertaken  by  one  when 
seated. 


ll£JI 

Tf  And  srfczr  from  the  standpoint  of  motionlessness. 

9.  And  (meditativeness  is  attributed)  from  the  standpoint  of 
motionlessness. 

Furthermore,  in  such  sentences  as,  “The  earth  is  in  meditation 
as  it  were”  (Ch.  VII.  vi.  1),  the  assertion  of  meditation  in  the 
cases  of  the  earth  etc.  is  made  from  the  standpoint  of  motion¬ 
lessness  alone.  That  also  is  a  sign  that  upasana  is  to  be  undertaken 
by  a  man  when  seated. 


832  BRAHMA  -  SOTR A  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  i.  10 

surcfor  ^  n?oii 

10.  Moreover,  they  mention  (this)  in  the  Svtftis. 

Moreover,  the  worthy  people  mention  this  in  such  Smrti 
passages  as  “Having  established  his  seat  firmly  in  a  clean  place” 
(Gita,  VI.  11).  It  is  because  of  this  that  the  sitting  postures  like 
padmasana  (lotus-seat)  are  prescribed  in  the  books  on  Yoga. 

Topic  7:  No  Restriction  of  Place 

wm  HU” 

zpr  Wherever  concentration  (is  possible)  5PT  there 

(one  should  meditate)  because  of  the  absence  of 

specification. 

11.  Meditation  is  to  be  undertaken  wherever  the  rrtind  gets 
concentrated,  because  there  is  no  specification. 

The  doubt  arises  about  the  direction,  place,  and  time,  as  to 
whether  there  is  any  regulation  about  them  or  not.  Now  some¬ 
body  may  think  that  since  in  the  Vedic  rites  the  directions  etc. 
are  noticed  to  be  well  determined,  the  case  must  be  similar  here 
as  well. 

The  answer  (of  the  Vedantin)  to  such  a  one  is  being  given. 
The  regulation  about  direction,  place,  and  time  is  concerned 
only  with  that  much  regarding  them  as  conduces  to  meditative¬ 
ness.  One  should  meditate  facing  any  direction,  in  any  place,  at 
any  time  that  leads  to  one’s  concentration  of  mind  easily.  Unlike 
the  regulations  fixing  the  eastern  direction,  forenoon,  and  a 
place  sloping  down  to  the  east,  and  so  on,  as  met  with  in  the 
cases  of  rites,  no  such  specific  regulation  is  mentioned  in  the 
Upani$ads;  while  the  one  thing  desirable  is  that  one  should 
always  have  concentration  of  mind  (while  engaged  in  updsand). 

Opponent :  Some  Upani$ads  prescribe  even  specific  rules  as  in, 
“One  should  concentrate  one’s  mind  on  the  supreme  Self  by 
taking  shelter  in  a  windless  cave  or  such  other  places  as  are 
level  and  clean,  free  from  pebbles,  fire,  and  sand,  free  from 
noise,  remote  from  busy  places  like  water  ponds  or  public  sheds, 


IV. i.  12]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  833 

and  at  the  same  time  pleasing  to  the  mind  but  not  oppressive 
to  the  eyes”  (§v.  II.  10). 

Ved&ntin :  True,  there  are  directions  like  that.  But  taking  for 
granted  these  directions,  the  aphorist  advises  like  a  friend  that 
with  regard  to  the  details  of  these  matters  there  is  no  hard  and 
fast  rule.  And  the  phrase  “pleasing  to  the  mind”  in  the  above 
quotation  only  shows  that  the  place  can  be  anywhere  that  is 
conducive  to  concentration. 

Topic  8:  Meditation  till  Death 

Doubt :  Under  the  first  topic  it  was  established  that  repetition 
is  to  be  welcomed  in  all  cases  of  contemplation.  Among  them, 
those  contemplations  that  are  meant  for  complete  enlightenment 
can  well  be  understood  to  have  a  limit  to  their  repetition,  inas¬ 
much  as  they  end  with  the  object  aimed  at,  as  is  seen  in  the 
process  of  husking  paddy  (which  stops  with  producing  rice). 
When  the  result,  consisting  in  full  enlightenment,  is  achieved,  no 
other  effort  can  be  prescribed,  since  a  man  goes  beyond  the 
domain  of  scripture  when  he  realizes  the  oneness  of  the  Self 
with  Brahman.  But  with  regard  to  those  meditations  which  have 
in  view  some  fruit  of  the  nature  of  secular  prosperity  this  doubt 
arises:  Should  one  stop  after  revolving  the  idea  in  one’s  mind 
for  a  certain  time,  or  should  one  do  so  for  life?  What  would 
be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  One  should  give  up  the  meditation  after  revolving 
the  idea  in  one’s  mind  for  a  certain  time,  since  thereby  is  fulfilled 
the  requirement  of  the  texts  enjoining  the  practice  of  repeated 
meditation. 

Vectitntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say: 


^  uw\ 


STC-srRTJTRJ  Up  till  the  moment  of  death  f$  for  3Tfa  even 
then  it  is  seen  (to  happen  in  the  scripture). 


12.  ( Meditation  is  to  be  repeated)  up  till  the  moment  of  death , 
for  it  is  noticed  in  the  scriptures  that  it  is  done  so  even  then . 
One  shall  contemplate  on  the  idea  repeatedly  till  the  moment 
53 


834  BRAHMA  - SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.i.  12 

of  death,  because  the  acquisition  of  the  unseen  potential  result 
of  action  is  dependent  on  the  final  contemplation  on  the  idea. 
For  even  the  fruits  of  past  actions  which  are  destined  to  produce 
a  result  enjoyable  in  a  subsequent  birth,  arouse  at  the  time  of 
death  a  pattern  of  consciousness  replete  with  the  thoughts 
conforming  to  that,  as  is  known  from  such  Upani$adic  texts  as, 
“Then  the  soul  has  consciousness  of  the  fruits  in  the  form  of 
impressions  that  it  has  to  experience,  and  it  goes  to  the  next 
body  which  is  the  fruit  associated  with  that  consciousness”  (Bj\ 
IV.  iv.  2),  “Together  with  whatever  world  (i.e.  result  of 
action)  he  had  in  mind  (at  the  time  of  death)  he  enters  into 
Prana.  Praya  in  combination  with  Udana  and  in  association  with 
the  soul  leads  him  to  the  world  desired  by  him”  (Pr.  III.  10). 
This  is  so  also  because  of  the  illustration  of  grass  and  a  leech 
(Bf.  IV.  iv.  3).  What  other  pattern  of  consciousness  can  these 
ideas  have  at  the  time  of  death  apart  from  their  repetition  just 
as  they  are?  Hence  those  ideas  are  to  be  revolved  in  the  mind 
till  death,  which  are  nothing  but  a  contemplation  of  that  very 
result  which  is  to  be  achieved.  Thus  it  is  that  a  Vedic  text  shows 
the  repetition  of  the  idea  at  the  time  of  death:  “The  resolves 
with  which  that  man  departs  from  this  world”  (§.  B.  X.  vi.  3.1). 
To  this  effect  occurs  the  Smrti  passage  also:  “Remembering 
whatever  object  at  the  end  he  leaves  the  body,  that  alone  is 
reached  by  him,  O  son  of  KuntI,  because  of  his  constant  thought 
of  that”  (Gita,  VIII.  6),  “at  the  time  of  death,  with  the  mind 
unmoving”  (Gita,  VIII.  10).  And  “He  shall  think  of  these  three 
at  the  time  of  death”  (Ch.  III.  xvii.  6)  shows  the  last  duty  that 
remains  to  be  done  at  the  time  of  death. 

Topic  9:  Knowledge  Destroys  all  Results  of  Actions 

The  topics  left  over  from  the  Third  Chapter  are  ended.  Now 
arises  some  consideration  regarding  the  result  of  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman. 

The  doubt  crops  up  as  to  whether  after  the  acquisition  of 
the  knowledge  of  Brahman,  its  opposite  result,  viz  sin,  is  removed 
or  not.  What  would  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent :  Since  work  is  done  for  some  result,  it  cannot  be 
obliterated  without  producing  its  result;  for  from  the  Vedas  it 


IV.  i.  1 3  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  835 

is  gathered  that  action  has  the  innate  power  of  ensuring  its 
result.  If  the  work  should  be  destroyed  even  before  its  fruit  is 
experienced,  the  Vedas  will  lose  their  validity.  In  the  Smjti  also 
we  have,  “For  the  results  of  work  are  not  destroyed”. 

Objection :  In  that  case  the  prescription  of  expiation  becomes 
useless. 

Opponent :  That  is  no  defect,  because  acts  of  expiation  are 
to  be  classed  with  occasional  rites7  like  the  sacrifice  occasioned 
by  one’s  house  being  burnt.  Moreover,  as  the  acts  of  expiation 
are  prescribed  as  a  consequence  of  the  commission  of  some  guilt, 
that  may  as  well  conduce  to  the  removal  of  that  guilt.  But  the 
knowledge  of  Brahman  is  not  prescribed  in  that  way. 

Objection :  Unless  it  is  admitted  that  the  results  of  past 
actions  are  washed  away  for  the  knower  of  Brahman,  he  will 
have  to  experience  the  results  of  those  actions  as  a  matter  of 
course,  so  that  there  will  be  no  liberation. 

Opponent :  The  answer  is  in  the  negative,  for  just  like  the 
results  of  actions,  liberation  comes  out  of  an  adequate  combina¬ 
tion  of  place,  time,  and  causation.  Hence  a  man  is  not  absolved 
of  his  sins  by  acquiring  the  knowledge  of  Brahman. 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  reply: 


On  the  realization  of  that  (Brahman),  (there  occur) 
3T$f non-attachment  and  destruction  (respectively) 
of  the  succeeding  and  earlier  sins 
because  it  is  declared  so. 


13.  On  the  realization  of  That ,  there  occur  the  non-attach¬ 
ment  and  destruction  of  the  subsequent  and  previous  sins  re¬ 
spectively  ,  because  it  is  declared  so. 

When  That,  viz  Brahman,  becomes  realized,  then  come  the 
non-attachment  of  subsequent  sins  and  the  destruction  of  the 
earlier  ones. 

Why? 


7  So  an  expiation  does  not  absolve  a  man  of  his  sins. 


836  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV. i.  13 

“Because  it  is  so  declared”  (in  the  scriptures).  Thus  it  is 
declared  in  the  course  of  dealing  with  the  knowledge  of 
Brahman  that  a  future  sin  that  might  be  expected  to  arise  in 
the  usual  way  does  not  arise  in  the  case  of  a  man  of  knowledge: 
“As  water  does  not  stick  to  a  lotus  leaf,  even  so  sin  does  not 
contaminate  a  man  possessed  of  this  knowledge”  (Ch.  IV.  xiv. 
3).  So  also  the  destruction  of  the  past  accumulated  sins  is  declar¬ 
ed  in,  “Just  as  the  fluffy  tip  of  a  reed  placed  in  fire  burns  away 
completely,  similarly  all  his  sins  are  burnt  away”  (V.  xxiv.  3). 
Here  occurs  another  declaration  about  the  destruction  of  the 
results  of  work:  “When  the  Self  which  is  both  high  and  low 
is  realized,  the  knot  of  the  heart  gets  untied,  all  doubts  become 
solved,  and  all  one’s  actions  become  dissipated”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  8). 

It  was  argued  that  on  the  assumption  that  the  results  of  works 
get  destroyed  even  before  being  experienced,  the  purport  of  the 
scripture  will  be  distorted.  But  that  creates  no  difficulty;  for  we 
do  not  mean  to  deny  the  power  of  works  to  produce  their 
results.  That  remains  just  as  it  is.  But  we  assert  that  this  power 
is  arrested  by  other  factors  like  knowledge  etc.  The  scripture  is 
committed  to  the  existence  of  the  power  of  work,  but  not  to 
the  existence  or  non-existence  of  opposing  factors.  Besides,  the 
Smrti  texts,  “For  the  results  of  work  are  not  destroyed”,  is  only 
a  general  rule;  for  the  potential  result  of  work  does  not  get 
destroyed  except  through  experience,  inasmuch  as  it  is  meant 
for  that.  As  a  matter  of  fact  it  is  desired  that  sin  should  be 
dissipated  by  expiation  etc.  as  it  is  stated  in  such  Vedic.  and 
Smjti  texts  as,  “He  gets  over  all  sins”,  “A  performer  of  the 
Asvamedha  sacrifice,  as  also  a  man  possessed  of  this  knowledge, 
gets  over  the  sin  of  killing  a  Brahmaga”  (Tai.  A.  V.  iii.  12.1). 

And  it  was  said  that  the  expiatory  rites  are  to  be  classed  with 
the  occasional  rites  (occasioned  by  certain  circumstances;  and 
hence  that  they  cannot  wash  away  the  sins).  But  that  is  wrong. 
Since  the  expiatory  rites  are  prescribed  in  connection  with 
certain  commissions,  they  may  well  have  the  destruction  of 
the  resulting  sins  as  their  effect;  and  hence  it  is  improper  to 
infer  some  unseen  potency  for  them  (as  in  the  case  of  occasional 
rites).  Again,  it  was  argued  that  unlike  expiatory  rites,  know¬ 
ledge  is  not  enjoined  for  dissipating  sins.  With  regards  to  this 


IV.  i.  13]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  837 

we  say:  In  the  case  of  meditations  on  the  qualified  Brahman, 
such  injunctions  are  surely  in  evidence.  And  in  the  comple¬ 
mentary  portion  of  these  it  is  stated  that  the  meditator  gets 
superhuman  powers  and  cessation  of  sin  as  his  reward.  Since 
there  is  nothing  to  show  that  these  two  results  are  not  intended 
to  be  indicated,  it  can  be  ascertained  that  those  meditations  lead 
to  the  acquisition  of  divine  powers  after  the  eradication  of  sins. 
But  as  regards  contemplation  on  the  absolute  Brahman,  though 
there  be  no  such  prescription,  still  it  ‘can  be  concluded  that  the 
burning  away  of  the  results  of  past  karma  is  the  effect  of  the 
realization  that  the  Self  is  free  from  all  actions. 

By  the  term  non-attachment  the  aphorist  implies  that  the 
knower  of  Brahman  has  no  idea  of  agentship  whatsoever  with 
regard  to  the  actions  occurring  in  future.  Although  the  man 
of  knowledge  appeared  to  have  some  ownership  of  the  past 
works  on  account  of  false  ignorance,  still  owing  to  the  cessation 
of  false  ignorance  through  the  power  of  knowledge,  those  works 
also  are  washed  away.  This  fact  is  stated  by  the  term  destruc¬ 
tion.  The  knower  of  Brahman  has  this  realization:  “As  opposed 
to  the  entity  known  before  as  possessed  of  agentship  and  experi- 
encership  by  its  very  nature,  I  am  Brahman  which  is  by  nature 
devoid  of  agentship  and  experiencership  in  all  the  three  periods 
of  time.  Even  earlier  I  was  never  an  agent  and  experiencer,  nor 
am  I  so  at  present,  nor  shall  I  be  so  in  future.”  From  such  a 
point  of  view  alone  can  liberation  be  justified.  For  on  a  contrary 
supposition — if  the  results  of  works  flowing  down  from  eternity 
continue  unhampered  in  their  course — there  can  be  no  libera¬ 
tion.  Besides,  liberation,  unlike  the  results  of  work,  cannot  be 
produced  by  a  concurrence  of  place,  time,  and  causation,  since 
that  would  make  it  impermanent.  It  is  also  unreasonable  that 
the  result  of  knowledge  (which  is  really  immediate)  should  be 
mediate  (as  the  opponents'  theory  implies).  Hence  the  conclu¬ 
sion  is  that  sin  becomes  dissipated  when  Brahman  is  known. 

Topic  10:  No  Remnant  of  Virtue  Even 

Under  the  previous  topic  it  was  ascertained  on  the  authority 
of  the  scriptures  that  when  knowledge  dawns,  it  causes  the 
non-attachment  and  destruction  of  all  potential  results  of 


838 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[IV.  i.  14 


works  that  are  naturally  calculated  to  cause  bondage.  But  a 
doubt  may  arise  that  the  virtuous  deeds  do  not  come  into 
conflict  with  the  knowledge  arising  from  the  scriptures,  since 
they  also  originate  from  the  same  source.  Taking  this  doubt 
into  consideration,  the  reasoning  of  the  previous  topic  is  being 
extended  here  with  a  view  to  dispelling  it. 

the  other  (i.e.  of  virtue)  affa  also  in  this  way 
arerjpr:  there  is  no  contact;  ^  surely  (liberation  comes) 
when  (the  body)  falls. 

14.  In  the  very  same  way  there  is  no  attachment  of  the  other 
(i.e.  of  virtue )  as  well .  Liberation  vmst  follow  as  soon  as  the 
body  falls. 

To  the  man  of  knowledge  occur  the  non-attachment  and 
destruction  “of  the  other  as  weir’,  of  virtue  also,  as  of  sin  itself. 

Why? 

Since  that  may  put  obstacles  in  the  path  of  the  fruition  of 
knowledge;  for  that  (virtue)  too  is  productive  of  its  own  result. 
In  the  Upani$adic  texts  like,  “He  conquers  both  of  them”  (Br. 
IV.  iv.  22),  the  destruction  of  virtue,  just  as  much  as  of  vice, 
is  declared,  since  the  destruction  of  action  consequent  on  the 
realization  of  the  Self  that  is  not  an  agent  occurs  equally  in  the 
cases  of  both  virtuous  and  vicious  acts,  and  since  the  Upani$ad 
speaks  of  the  destruction  of  all  works  without  any  exception 
in  “and  all  one’s  actions  become  dissipated”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  8).  Even 
where  the  single  word  vice  is  used,  the  word  virtue  is  also  to  be 
understood,  because  its  result  is  inferior  to  that  of  knowledge. 
Moreover,  in  the  Upani$ad  itself  occurs  the  word  vice  to  convey 
the  idea  of  virtue  as  well.  Thus  in  the  sentence,  “Day  and  night 
cannot  reach  this  barrage  (which  is  the  Self)”  (Ch.  VIII.  iv. 
1),  virtue  is  introduced  along  with  vice;  then  it  is  said,  “All 
sins  desist  from  It  (the  Self)”  (ibid.),8  thereby  using  the  word 

8  The  full  text  is,  “Now  then,  that  which  is  the  Self  is  a  barrage  that 
holds  apart,  so  that  the  worlds  may  not  get  mixed  up.  Day  and  night 


IV.  i.  15]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHAgYA  839 

sin  (vice)  to  indicate  virtue  as  well  without  any  distinction.  In 
“ pate  tiC\  the  word  tu  (lit.  but)  is  used  to  imply  emphasis.  The 
text  emphasizes  the  fact  that  since  virtue  and  vice,  causing 
bondage,  are  thus  shown  to  become  separated  and  destroyed  by 
the  power  of  knowledge,  liberation  must  come  to  the  man  of 
enlightenment  when  his  body  falls. 

Topic  11:  Past  Accumulated  Results  are  Destroyed 

Under  the  previous  topic  it  was  ascertained  that  virtue  and 
vice  are  destroyed  by  knowledge.  Now  it  is  being  discussed 
whether  that  destruction  occurs  indiscriminately  with  regard  to 
all  the  virtues  and  vices  that  have  begun  or  have  not  begun  to 
yield  their  fruits,  or  they  occur  specifically  with  regard  to 
those  virtues  and  vices  that  have  not  begun  to  yield  fruits.  Now 
since  in  the  Upani$adic  texts  like  “He  conquers  both  of  them” 
(Bf.  IV.  iv.  22),  no  specification  is  met  with,  the  destruction 
may  occur  indiscriminately  to  all.  That  being  the  possibility, 
the  aphorist  refutes  by  saying. 

^  §  $  5RS&  \\VU\ 

g  But  ^cf  (the)  past  (two)  <JMR«^-^rR  which  have  not 
begun  to  produce  results  tr^-  alone  (are  destroyed)  cRpareR: 
for  that  (death)  is  set  as  the  limit  of  waiting  for  that  liberation. 

15.  But  only  those  past  (virtues  and  vices)  get  destroyed 
which  have  not  begun  to  bear  fruit ,  for  death  is  set  as  the  limit 
of  waiting  for  liberation. 

After  the  acquisition  of  knowledge,  those  virtues  and  vices 
that  have  not  begun  to  yield  their  fruits  and  that  were  accumul¬ 
ated  in  earlier  lives  or  even  in  this  life  before  the  dawn  of  know¬ 
ledge  are  alone  destroyed,  but  not  so  are  those  destroyed  whose 
results  have  already  been  partially  enjoyed  and  by  which  has 
been  begun  this  present  life  in  which  the  knowledge  of  Brahman 
arises. 


cannot  reach  this  barrage,  nor  old  age  and  death  and  sorrow,  nor  virtue 
and  vice.  All  sins  desist  from  It,  since  this  is  the  world  of  Brahman 
unafflicted  by  sin.” 


840  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  i.  15 

How  is  this  known? 

Because  the  text,  “He  lingers  so  long  only  as  he  is  not  freed 
from  the  body;  then  he  becomes  free”  (Ch.  VI.  xiv.  2),  shows 
that  liberation  is  put  off  till  the  death  of  the  body.  Were  it  not 
so,  the  text  would  not  have  spoken  of  any  waiting  till  the  death 
of  the  body.  For  one  would  then  attain  liberation  immediately 
after  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  inasmuch  as  there  would  be 
no  reason  for  his  continuing  in  the  body  after  all  the  works  are 
annihilated  by  knowledge. 

Opponent:  If  this  realization  that  the  Self  is  not  an  agent 
annihilates  all  results  of  work  by  its  own  intrinsic  power,  how 
can  it  demolish  only  some  leaving  behind  others?  For  when  the 
same  kind  of  contact  is  present  between  fire  and  some  seeds,  it 
cannot  be  held  that  some  of  the  seeds  will  lose  their  power  of 
germination  while  others  will  not. 

Veddntin :  The  answer  is:  It  cannot  be  that  knowledge  can 
arise  without  the  help  of  some  residual  results  of  actions  that 
have  begun  to  bear  fruit.  And  when  it  is  granted  that  knowledge 
is  based  on  that  medium  (viz  the  body  produced  by  the  residual 
results),  it  is  but  natural  that  knowledge  has  to  wait  (for  its 
result)  till  the  acquired  momentum  of  that  medium  exhausts 
itself  out  as  in  the  case  of  a  wheel  of  a  potter;  for  there  is 
nothing  to  stop  it  in  the  intervening  period.  As  for  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  the  Self  as  the  non-performer  of  any  act,  that  destroys 
the  results  of  works  by  first  sublating  false  ignorance.  This  false 
ignorance,  even  when  sublated,  continues  for  a  while  owing  to 
past  tendencies  like  the  continuance  of  the  vision  of  two  moons.9 
Furthermore,  no  difference  of  opinion  is  possible  here  as  to 
whether  the  body  is  retained  (after  knowledge)  for  some  time 
or  not  by  the  knowers  of  Brahman.  For  when  somebody  feels 
in  his  heart  that  he  has  realized  Brahman  and  yet  holds  the  body, 
how  can  this  be  denied  by  somebody  else?  This  very  fact  is 
elaborated  in  the  Upani$ads  and  the  Smrtis  in  the  course  of 
determining  the  characteristics  of  “the  man  of  steady  wisdom” 
(sthitaprajna — Gita,  II.  54).  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  only 


"For  a  man  who  had  suffered  from  eye-disease,  the  false  idea  may 
persist  for  some  time  even  after  the  defect  is  removed. 


IV.  i.  16]  BRAHMA  -  SCrTRA  -  BHA$YA  841 

those  virtues  and  vices  are  washed  away  by  knowledge  which 
have  not  begun  to  bear  fruit. 

Topic  12:  Agnihotra  etc. 

3rfV^talf«  ^  dc+rcfof  \\\%\\ 

5  But  arfr^fT-arTft  Agnihotra  etc.  cT^Fnifa  are  conducive 
to  that  result  it^  surely  f°r  so  11  ls  revealed. 

16.  But  Agnihotra  etc.  conduce  to  the  very  same  result ,  for 
so  it  is  revealed  (in  the  Upanifads). 

The  conclusion  arrived  at  about  the  non-attachment  and 
destruction  of  sin  in  the  case  of  the  man  of  knowledge  was 
extended  to  the  non-attachment  and  destruction  of  virtue  as 
well.  Lest  it  be  inferred  that  this  extension  covers  all  kinds  of 
virtue,  it  is  being  refuted  by  the  aphorism,  “But  (daily)  Agni¬ 
hotra  etc”.  The  word  “but”  refutes  the  misconception.  The 
obligatory  daily  duties  like  Agnihotra ,  enjoined  in  the  Vedas,  are 
meant  for  that  very  result.  The  idea  is  that  their  result  is  the 
same  as  that  of  knowledge. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

From  such  Upani$adic  texts  as,  “The  Brahmaoas  seek  to  know 
It  through  the  study  of  the  Vedas,  sacrifices,  charity,  and  aus¬ 
terity”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22). 

Opponent :  Since  knowledge  and  works  produce  divergent 
results,  they  cannot  reasonably  have  the  same  result. 

Vedantin  :  That  creates  no  difficulty;  for  just  as  curds  and 
poison,  known  to  produce  fever  and  death  respectively,  become 
tasteful  and  nourishing  when  mixed  with  sugar  and  mantra , 
similarly  (religious)  work  also,  when  associated  with  knowledge, 
may  lead  to  liberation. 

Opponent:  Since  liberation  has  no  beginning,  how  can  it  be 
said  to  be  an  effect  of  work? 

Vedantin :  That  objection  is  hollow,  since  work  helps  from  a 
distance  (i.e.  indirectly)  in  producing  the  result.  As  work  leads 
gradually  to  knowledge,  it  is  said  by  courtesy  to  lead  to  libera¬ 
tion  itself.  Accordingly,  the  statement  that  knowledge  and  work 


842  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  i.  16 

produce  the  same  result  refers  to  the  work  that  had  preceded 
knowledge,  for  the  knower  of  Brahman  can  have  no  such  rite 
as  Agnihotra  etc.  after  enlightenment,  because  as  a  result  of  the 
realization  of  the  unity  of  the  Self  with  Brahman  that  cannot 
be  the  object  of  any  injunction,  the  man  of  enlightenment  has 
walked  out  of  the  pale  of  scriptures.  But  so  far  as  meditation  on 
the  qualified  Brahman  is  concerned,  a  subsequent  performance 
of  Agnihotra  etc.  is  possible,  since  the  agentship  for  such  a 
meditator  remains  intact.  Even  so,  when  these  are  performed 
without  any  motive  and  hence  have  no  separate  result,  they 
can  well  be  associated  with  meditation. 

Opponent :  Well  then,  to  what  action  does  this  statement 
about  the  non-attachment  and  destruction  of  the  results  of  works 
refer  to?  And  to  what  action  does  this  Vedic  assignment  (of 
results  to  friends,  foes,  and  others)  refer  to  as  stated  in  the  fol¬ 
lowing  sentence  found  in  a  certain  branch  of  the  Vedas:  “His 
sons  inherit  his  wealth;  the  friends  acquire  the  merits;  and  the 
foes  get  the  demerits”  (Kau.  I.  4)? 

Hence  the  aphorist  replies: 


aTcfts^TTsfa  U?V9ll 

3RT:  Apart  from  these  3RTT  another  action  arfa  also 
certainly  (exists)  according  to  some  people;  (the  assign¬ 
ment  to  friends,  foes,  and  others  refers  to  this);  accord¬ 

ing  to  both  (Jaimini  and  Badarayaija). 

17.  Besides  these ,  there  is  also  another  kind  of  (good)  action 
with  regard  to  which  some  people  (make  the  assignment)  y 
according  to  both  Jaimini  and  Badardyana. 

Apart  from  these  obligatory  rites  like  Agnihotra  etc.  other 
good  works  surely  exist  that  are  performed  with  a  motive  for 
results.  Of  these,  the  appropriation  has  been  indicated  by 
people  of  a  certain  (branch  of  the  Vedas)  in,  “The  friends 
acquire  the  merits”  etc.  And  by  saying,  “In  the  very  same  way, 
there  are  non-attachment  and  destruction  of  the  others  (i.e. 
virtues)  as  well”  (B.  S.  IV.  i.  14),  the  non-attachment  and  de¬ 
struction  of  these  very  works  have  been  ascertained.  Thus  both 


IV.  i.  18]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHA5YA  843 

the  teachers  Jaimini  and  Badarayaga  agree  in  accepting  the  view 
that  this  kind  of  works,  done  with  a  desire,  do  not  help  in  the 
generation  of  knowledge. 

Topic  13:  Rites  Unaccompanied  by  Meditation 

Doubt :  Under  the  topic  just  finished  it  has  been  well  estab¬ 
lished  that  when  the  obligatory  duties  like  Agnihotra  etc.  are 
done  for  the  purpose  of  getting  liberation  by  one  aspiring  for 
it,  they  become  the  cause  of  exhausting  the  accumulated  sins, 
and  thereby  the  cause  for  purifying  the  mind.  Becoming  in  this 
way  contributory  to  the  realization  of  Brahman,  which  leads 
to  liberation,  they  come  to  have  the  same  result  as  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  Brahman  itself.  Now  these  Agnihotra  etc.  may  be 
performed  along  with  meditations  that  are  based  on  the 
auxiliaries  of  rites  or  without  them.  For  from  the  following  texts 
we  know  that  Agnihotra  etc.  can  be  done  either  separately  or 
along  with  meditation:  “One  who  possessed  of  such  knowledge 
makes  a  sacrifice”,  “One  who  possessed  of  such  knowledge  pours 
the  oblation”,  “One  who  knowing  thus  chants  the  hymn”,  “One 
who  knowing  thus  sings”,  “Therefore  one  should  select  a  man 
possessed  of  this  knowledge  as  (the  priest  called)  Brahma,  and 
not  one  who  is  ignorant  of  this”  (Ch.  IV.  xvii.  10),  “With  that 
Om  both  perform  rites — the  one  who  knows  and  the  one  who 
does  not”  (Ch.  I.  i.  10).  Now  the  point  to  be  considered  is 
whether  Agnihotra  and  other  rites,  not  just  as  they  are  but  as 
associated  with  meditation,  become  the  cause  of  knowledge  to 
an  aspirant  for  liberation  and  thus  come  to  produce  the  same 
result  as  knowledge,  or  such  rites  do  so,  equally  without  distinc¬ 
tion,  either  by  themselves  or  in  association  with  knowledge. 

Why  does  this  doubt  crop  up? 

Since  in  the  text,  “They  seek  to  know  it  through  sacrifice” 
(Bj\  IV.  iv.  22),  the  rites  like  Agnihotra  are  heard  of  without 
any  reservation  as  the  causes  of  knowledge,  and  since  Agnihotra 
etc.  when  associated  with  meditation  are  known  to  acquire  a 
special  advantage.  What  should  be  the  conclusion  then? 

Opponent :  Rites  like  Agnihotra  etc.  when  associated  with 
meditation  can  alone  become  helpful  to  the  knowledge  of  the 
Self,  but  not  so  those  that  are  devoid  of  meditation.  For  a  man  of 


844  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.i.18 

knowledge  is  known  to  have  an  advantage  over  the  man  without 
knowledge  from  such  Upani?adic  texts  as,  “He  who  knows  as 
above  conquers  further  death  the  very  day  he  makes  that  offer¬ 
ing”  (Bj\  I.  v.  2),  and  from  such  Smjti  texts  as,  “Endowed  with 
which  wisdom,  O  son  of  Pjtha,  thou  shalt  break  through  the 
bonds  of  karma"  (Gita,  II.  39),  “Work  with  desire  is  verily  far 
inferior  to  that  performed  with  the  mind  undisturbed  by  the 
thoughts  of  results,  O  Dhananjaya”  (Gita,  II.  49). 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  explains: 

fwtfa  %  it 

Whatever  (is  done)  ftfiPTT  with  knowledge”—^ 
this  text  surely  (shows  this). 

18.  The  Upani$adic  text ,  “whatever  is  done  with  knowledge ” 
surely  indicates  this. 

It  is  true  that  Agnihotra  and  other  rites  when  associated  with 
meditation  are  better  than  the  Agnihotra  etc.  not  associated  with 
meditation,  just  as  much  as  a  learned  Brahmana  is  better  than  a 
Brahmaoa  without  learning.  Even  so,  Agnihotra  and  other  rites 
are  not  absolutely  useless  when  they  are  not  associated  with 
meditation. 

Why? 

Since  in  the  Upani§adic  text,  “They  seek  to  know  It  through 
sacrifice”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  22),  the  rites  like  Agpihotra  etc.  are  heard 
of  without  any  reservation  as  the  means  of  knowledge. 

Opponent :  Since  it  is  known  that  Agnihotra  etc.  when  asso¬ 
ciated  with  meditation  have  a  distinct  advantage  over  those 
without  meditation,  it  is  but  proper  to  say  that  Agfiihotra  etc. 
when  unassociated  with  meditation  are  not  conducive  to 
knowledge. 

Vedantin :  That  is  not  so.  It  is  rather  proper  to  think  that 
since  Agnihotra  etc.,  when  associated  with  meditation,  acquire 
a  certain  distinction  owing  to  the  presence  of  meditation,  there¬ 
fore  they  have  just  a  special  efficacy  in  producing  knowledge, 
while  it  is  not  so  in  the  case  of  mere  Agfiihotra  etc.  that  are  not 
similarly  associated;  from  that,  however,  one  cannot  conclude 


IV.  i.  19]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  845 

that  Agnihotra  etc.,  heard  of  in  a  general  way  in  the  text,  “They 
seek  to  know  through  sacrifices”,  as  auxiliaries  of  knowledge,  are 
not  their  auxiliaries.  For  the  passage  which  declares,  “Whatever 
one  does  along  with  knowledge,  faith,  and  meditation,  becomes 
more  efficacious”  (Ch.  I.  i.  10),  speaks  of  the  rites  like  Agni¬ 
hotra  etc.  as  becoming  “more  efficacious”  in  producing  their 
own  results  when  they  are  associated  with  their  own  medita¬ 
tions;  it  thereby  shows  that  the  very  same  Agnihotra  etc.  have 
at  least  some  efficacy  in  producing  their  results  even  when  not 
in  association  with  meditation.  The  efficacy  of  a  rite  consists  in 
its  being  able  to  fulfil  its  own  purpose.  Hence  the  conclusion  is 
this:  The  obligatory  rites  like  Agnihotra  etc.,  both  as  associated 
and  unassociated  with  meditation,  that  were  undertaken  either  in 
this  life  or  the  previous  life  before  the  dawn  of  knowledge,  with 
a  view  to  attaining  liberation  by  one  who  hankers  after  it, 
become  the  destroyers  as  far  as  possible  of  the  accumulated 
sins  that  stand  in  the  way  of  the  realization  of  Brahman.  Thus 
indirectly  they  become  the  cause  of  the  realization  of  Brahman 
Itself,  so  that  in  collaboration  with  such  proximate  causes  of 
enlightenment  as  hearing,  reflection,  faith,  meditation,  devoted¬ 
ness,  etc.,  they  come  to  have  the  same  result  as  the  knowledge 
of  Brahman  has. 

Topic  14:  Experience  of  the  Active  Merit  and  Demerit 

nffor  fNtft  nun 

5  But  qrrElHrT  exhausting  ^  the  other  two  iffor  through 
experiencing  (them)  one  merges  in  Brahman. 

19.  But  the  (enlightened)  man  merges  in  Brahman  after 
exhausting  the  other  two,  (viz  merit  and  demerit  that  have 
started  fruition),  by  experiencing  (their  results  in  the  present 
life). 

It  has  been  said  that  the  virtues  and  vices  that  have  not  begun 
yielding  their  results  get  annihilated  through  the  power  of 
knowleage.  But  from  the  texts  like,  “He  has  to  tarry  so  long  as 
the  body  does  not  fall,  and  then  he  merges  (in  Brahman)”  (Ch. 


846  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  i.  19 

VI.  xiv.  2),  “Being  but  Brahman,  he  is  merged  in  Brahman”  (Bf. 
IV.  iv.  6),  it  is  known  that  the  other  virtues  and  vices  that  have 
already  begun  to  fructify  are  exhausted  through  experiencing 
the  results,  and  then  the  aspirant  becomes  Brahman. 

Opponent :  May  it  not  be  that  on  the  analogy  of  seeing  two 
moons,  the  dualistic  vision  will  persist  even  when  the  body  falls 
just  as  much  as  that  vision  continues  as  long  as  the  body  lasts 
even  after  full  enlightenment? 

Vedantin :  No,  since  there  is  no  reason  for  this.  That  the 
dualistic  vision  lasts  before  the  fall  of  the  body  is  because  of 
the  need  of  exhausting  the  remaining  portion  of  (the  result  of 
active  virtue  and  vice)  through  experience.  But  here  after  death 
there  is  no  such  factor  present. 

Opponent :  May  not  other  outstanding  virtues  and  vices  pro¬ 
duce  newer  experiences? 

Vedantin :  No,  since  their  seeds  are  burnt  away.  For  other 
outstanding  results  of  works  can  produce  a  fresh  body  after  the 
death  of  the  present  one  only  when  they  have  false  ignorance  to 
prop  them  up.  But  that  false  ignorance  has  been  burnt  away  by 
full  enlightenment.  Therefore  it  is  but  proper  that  when  the 
effect  already  produced  wears  away,  liberation  comes  inevitably 
to  the  man  of  knowledge. 


Section  II 


Topic  1:  At  Death  the  Organs  Merge  in  Mind 

\\\W 

«n^  Speech  (merges)  jprfff  in  the  mind  because  it  is 

so  perceived  ^  and  from  scriptural  statement. 

1 .  The  (junction)  of  the  organ  of  speech  merges  in  the  mind 
(at  the  time  of  death)  for  so  it  is  seen ,  and  so  the  Upanifads  say . 

Now  before  introducing  the  path  of  the  gods,  meant  for  arriv¬ 
ing  at  the  result  of  the  inferior  meditations  (i.e.  on  the  qualified 
Brahman),  the  aphorist  first  speaks  of  the  order  of  the  departure 
(from  the  body)  as  taught  by  the  scriptures.  He  will  say  later 
that  the  departure  is  similar  for  both  the  man  who  has  the 
knowledge1  (of  the  qualified  Brahman)  and  the  man  who  has 
not.  Thus  occurs  the  Upani$adic  text  about  death,  “O  amiable 
one,  when  this  man  is  about  to  die,  his  speech  is  withdrawn  into 
the  mind,  the  mind  into  the  vital  force,  the  vital  force  into  fire, 
and  fire  into  the  supreme  Deity”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6). 

Doubt :  Now  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  above  passage 
speaks  of  the  entry  into  the  mind  of  the  organ  of  speech  together 
with  its  functions  or  of  the  entry  of  the  functions  alone. 

Opponent :  While  under  this  doubt,  the  conclusion  that  can 
be  drawn  is  that  the  organ  of  speech  itself  enters  into  the  mind; 
for  thus  would  (the  proper  sense  of)  the  passage  be  honoured, 
while  otherwise  one  would  have  to  resort  to  a  figure  of  speech. 
Whenever  a  doubt  arises  about  the  literal  or  figurative  meaning 
of  a  text,  the  literal  one  has  to  be  accepted  and  not  the  figurative. 
Hence  the  withdrawal  here  is  of  the  organ  of  speech  itself  into 
the  mind. 

'Although  the  text  speaks  of  “ vidvari\  Anandagiri  takes  it  in  the  sense 
of  a  meditator  on  the  qualified  Brahman,  while  Ratnaprabha  uses  the 
term  “upasaka— meditator”  as  its  synonym. 


848  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  ii.  1 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say  that  the  functions 
alone  of  the  organ  of  speech  are  withdrawn  into  the  mind. 

Opponent :  How  is  this  interpretation  about  the  withdrawal 
of  the  functions  of  the  organ  of  speech  arrived  at  when  the 
teacher’s  (i.e.  aphorist’s)  statement  is,  “Speech  goes  into  the 
mind”? 

Veddntin :  This  is  true,  but  later  he  will  state,  “The  parts 
(i.e.  the  organs  of  the  enlightened  man),  merged  in  Brahman, 
become  non-distinct  from  It  on  the  authority  of  the  scriptures” 
(IV.  ii.  16).  Hence  it  is  understood  that  what  is  meant  here  is 
merely  the  cessation  of  the  functions  (of  all  in  general).  If, 
however,  the  merger  of  the  organ  of  speech  itself  be  meant,  then 
since  the  non-distinction  is  the  same  everywhere  (for  the  enlight¬ 
ened  and  the  ignorant),  why  should  the  aphorist  make  a  separate 
mention  of  it  (in  the  case  of  the  enlightened)  by  saying,  “non- 
distinct”  (in  IV.  ii.  16)?  So  the  intended  meaning  here  being  the 
cessation  of  the  functions  of  the  organ  of  speech,  the  idea  con¬ 
veyed  is  that  the  functions  of  the  organ  of  speech  become 
withdrawn  even  while  the  functions  of  the  mind  continue. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

Because  it  is  seen  to  be  so.  For  it  is  a  matter  of  experience 
that  the  power  of  speech  stops  earlier  even  while  the  power  of 
the  mind  still  continues.  Not  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  organ 
of  speech  together  with  its  functions  into  the  mind  can  actually 
be  seen  by  anybody. 

Opponent :  On  the  strength  of  the  Vedic  text  it  can  be 
asserted  that  what  is  spoken  of  here  is  the  merger  of  the  organ 
of  speech  into  the  mind  itself. 

Veddntin :  The  answer  is  given  by  saying,  no,  since  that  is  not 
its  material  cause.  A  thing  can  merge  into  what  its  material 
cause  is,  as  for  instance  an  earthen  plate  into  earth.  But  there  is  no 
valid  proof  to  show  that  the  organ  of  speech  originates  from  the 
mind;  whereas  the  engagement  of  the  functions  in  activity  or 
their  disengagement  is  seen  to  be  based  on  something  that  may 
not  be  the  material  cause.  For  instance,  the  activity  of  fire,  which 
is  of  the  nature  of  light  and  heat,  ( tejas )  may  originate  from 
fuel  which  is  by  nature  earth,  and  it  may  get  extinguished  in 
water. 


IV.  ii.  3 ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  849 

Opponent :  On  such  an  interpretation,  how  will  the  Upa- 
ni$adic  text,  “Speech  is  withdrawn  into  the  mind”  (Ch.  VI.  viii. 
6)  be  reconciled? 

Ved&ntin :  That  is  why  the  aphorist  says,  “and  so  the  Upa- 
nijads  say”  (in  a  figurative  sense  that  is  not  antagonistic  to 
reason).  The  idea  implied  is  that  the  Upani§adic  text  fits  in 
with  this  interpretation  according  to  which  the  organ  and  its 
functions  are  understood  to  be  the  same  in  a  figurative  sense.2 

IR|I 

And  arcT:  for  the  same  reason  gqff&i  all  (the  functions 

of  all  the  organs)  follows  (i.e.  get  merged  in  the  mind). 

2.  And  for  the  same  reason  all  the  functions  of  all  the  organs 
get  merged  in  the  mind . 

In  the  text,  “Therefore  one  who  gets  his  light  extinguished 
(or  heat  cooled  off)  attains  rebirth  together  with  the  organs  that 
enter  into  the  mind”  (Pr.  III.  9),  we  hear  of  the  entry  of  all 
the  organs  without  exception  into  the  mind.  Since  even  here, 
“for  the  same  reason”  (as  in  the  foregoing  aphorism),  viz  that 
just  like  the  organ  of  speech,  the  organs  of  sight  etc.  are  seen 
to  lose  their  functions  even  when  the  mind  continues  to  be 
active,  and  since  it  is  not  possible  that  the  organs  as  such  can 
merge  in  the  mind,  and  since  the  Upani$adic  text  also  fits  in  thus, 
therefore  the  conclusion  is  that  it  is  in  the  sense  of  the  cessation 
of  their  functions  alone  that  all  the  organs  get  withdrawn  into 
the  mind.  Although  there  is  no  exception  to  this  withdrawal  of 
all  the  organs  into  the  mind,  the  separate  mention  of  the  organ 
of  speech  (in  the  first  aphorism)  is  in  accordance  with  its  men¬ 
tion  in,  “Speech  is  withdrawn  into  the  mind”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6). 

Topic  2:  Mind  Merges  in  Prana 

Doubt :  It  is  well  understood  that  in  the  text,  “Speech  is 
withdrawn  into  the  mind”,  what  is  intended  to  imply  is  the 
withdrawal  of  the  functions.  Now,  as  regards  the  succeeding 

•The  literal  sense  being  impossible,  a  resort  to  a  figure  of  speech  is 
quite  logical. 

54 


850  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.ii.3 

text,  “The  mind  into  the  vital  force”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6),  is  it  the 
withdrawal  of  the  functions  alone  that  is  meant  here  as  well,  or 
is  it  the  withdrawal  of  the  possessor  of  the  functions? 

Opponent :  When  under  such  a  doubt,  the  conclusion  should 
be  that  the  withdrawal  of  the  possessor  of  the  functions  is  meant 
here,  since  this  view  is  supported  by  Upani$adic  texts  and  since 
the  vital  force  can  well  be  the  material  cause  of  the  mind.  Thus 
we  have,  “O  amiable  one,  the  mind  is  derived  from  food  (i.e. 
earth),  food  is  derived  from  water”  (Ch.  VI.  v.  4),  where  the 
scripture  mentions  the  mind  as  originating  from  food  and  food 
from  water.  There  occurs  also  the  Upani$adic  text,  “And  water 
created  food”  (Ch.  VI.  ii.  4).  So  to  say  that  the  mind  merges 
in  the  vital  force  is  the  same  as  to  say  that  food  itself  merges 
in  water;  for  food  is  mind,  and  water  is  the  vital  force,  since  a 
material  cause  and  its  transformations  are  the  same. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say, 

3FR:  5TM  ll^ll 

^  That  w.  mind  (merges)  in  the  vital  force  3^^  as 
(revealed)  in  the  subsequent  (text). 

3.  That  mind  merges  in  the  vital  force  as  is  revealed  in  the 
subsequent  text . 

From  the  subsequent  portion  of  the  text  (cited  above)  it  is  to 
be  understood  that  when  this  mind  merges  in  the  vital  force, 
it  does  so  through  (the  absorption  of)  its  functions  alone  togeth¬ 
er  with  the  functions  of  the  external  organs  that  are  withdrawn 
into  it.  Thus  it  is  that  when  a  man  wants  to  sleep  or  is  about  to 
die,  the  activities  of  the  mind  are  seen  to  cease  even  while  the 
function  of  the  vital  force,  consisting  in  its  vibration  (respira¬ 
tion),  still  persists.  Besides,  the  mind  as  such  cannot  merge  into 
the  vital  force,  since  that  is  not  its  material  source. 

Opponent :  Have  we  not  shown  that  the  vital  force  is  the 
material  cause  of  the  mind? 

Vedantin :  That  is  not  valid,  for  it  is  not  logical  that  the  mind 
should  merge  into  the  vital  force  in  accordance  with  the  above 
ratiocination.  For  even  so,  the  mind  would  have  to  be  absorbed 


IV.  ii.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  851 

into  food  (i.e.  earth),  food  into  water,  and  the  vital  force  too 
into  water.  But  even  from  such  a  standpoint  no  proof  can  be 
adduced  to  show  that  the  mind  originates  from  water  trans¬ 
formed  into  the  vital  force.  Hence  the  mind  as  such  does  not 
get  absorbed  into  the  vital  force.  It  was  also  shown  earlier  that 
the  text  can  fit  in  even  if  the  merger  of  the  functions  is  meant, 
for  the  functions  and  the  possessor  of  the  functions  are  figura¬ 
tively  understood  to  be  the  same. 

Topic  3:  Prana  Merges  into  the  Soul 

Doubt :  This  much  has  been  established  that  the  functions  of 
one  entity  can  be  withdrawn  into  some  other  entity  that 
is  not  its  material  cause,  but  not  so  can  the  entity  itself  be 
absorbed.  Now  with  regard  to  the  text,  “the  vital  force  into 
( tejas )  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6),  the  consideration  that  arises  is 
whether  the  function  of  the  vital  force  is  withdrawn  into  fire, 
just  as  the  text  literally  implies,  or  is  it  withdrawn  into  the  soul 
that  is  the  master  of  this  cage  formed  by  the  body  and  sense- 
organs? 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  vital  force  should  get  absorbed 
into  fire,  since  the  meaning  of  a  Upani$adic  text  cannot  be  laid 
bare  to  doubts  and  because  it  is  improper  to  imagine  something 
not  heard  of. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  explains: 

*rtSHT&  tffMTOifasr:  irmi 

ST:  That  (Prana)  apai%  (merges)  into  the  presiding  entity 
(i.e.  the  Self)  because  of  such  facts  as  ap¬ 

proaching  that. 

4.  That  one  (i.e,  the  vital  force)  is  (known  to  be)  'withdrawn 
into  the  ruler  (i.e.  the  individual  Self)  from  such  facts  as 
approaching  that  (Self  at  the  time  of  death). 

“That  one”,  the  vital  force  that  is  being  considered,  subsists 
in  “the  ruler”,  in  the  (individual)  Self  identified  with  the  intel¬ 
lect  and  having  ignorance,  past  works,  and  past  experiences  as 
Its  limiting  adjuncts;  that  is  to  say,  the  activities  of  the  vital 
force  remain  chiefly  concerned  with  It. 


852  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  ii.  4 

How  is  this  known? 

“From  such  facts  as  its  approaching  that  Self.”  For  thus  it  is 
that  another  Upani$adic  passage  shows  in  a  general  way  how  all 
the  pranas  (organs)  without  exception  approach  the  ruler,  “All 
the  organs  approach  the  departing  man  at  the  time  of  death 
when  breathing  becomes  difficult”  (Bf.  IV.  iii.  38);  and  in  the 
text,  “When  it  departs,  the  vital  force  follows”  (Bj%  IV.  iv.  2), 
it  is  specially  shown  how  the  vital  force,  having  five  functions, 
follows  the  ruler;  and  in  the  text,  “When  the  vital  force  departs 
all  the  organs  ( pranas )  follow”  (ibid.),  it  is  shown  how  the 
other  pranas  follow  the  vital  force.  Besides,  by  showing  in  the 
text,  “Then  the  Self  remains  equipped  with  the  organs  of 
knowledge”  (ibid.),  that  the  ruler  has  consciousness  inside,  it  is 
made  clear  that  the  vital  force,  with  the  sense-organs  merged  in 
it,  subsists  in  that  soul. 

Opponent :  Since  the  Upani$ad  declares,  “The  vital  force  is 
withdrawn  into  fire”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6),  how  can  an  erroneous 
meaning  be  asserted  by  saying  that  it  goes  to  the  ruler? 

Vedantin  :  That  creates  no  difficulty,  since  in  such  activities 
as  leaving  the  body,  the  soul  plays  the  dominant  part  and  any 
special  point  stated  in  other  Upani$ads  has  to  be  taken  into 
account. 

Opponent :  How  then  is  the  Upani$adic  text  to  be  explained 
that  the  vital  force  is  withdrawn  into  fire  ( tejas )? 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  aphorist  says, 

^  11*11 

(The  soul  stays)  among  the  elements  that 

being  so  declared  in  the  Upani$ads. 

5.  The  soul  comes  to  stay  among  the  elements ,  it  being  so 
declared  by  the  Upani$ads. 

On  the  authority  of  the  text,  “The  vital  force  is  withdrawn 
into  fire”,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  this  ruler,  associated  with 
the  vital  force,  exists  amidst  the  subtle  elements  that  are  asso¬ 
ciated  with  fire  and  constitute  the  seed  of  the  body. 

Opponent :  But  that  text  shows  the  existence  of  the  vital  force 


IV.  ii.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  853 

in  fire,  and  not  of  the  existence  of  the  ruler,  accompanied  by 
the  vital  force,  in  fire. 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect,  since  in  the  aphorism,  “That  one 
is  merged  in  the  ruler”,  it  has  been  pointed  out  that  the  ruler 
also  is  to  be  understood  as  having  been  mentioned  by  the 
Upani$ad  in  between  the  vital  force  and  fire;  for  one,  who 
having  gone  from  Srughna  to  Mathura,  proceeds  then  to 
Pataliputra,  may  well  be  said  to  have  proceeded  from  Srughna 
to  Pataliputra.  Hence  the  text,  “The  vital  force  is  withdrawn 
into  fire”  is  to  be  understood  to  mean  that  it  is  the  ruler  (i.e. 
soul)  itself,  associated  with  the  vital  force,  that  continues  to 
stay  amidst  the  subtle  elements  which  are  the  associates  of  tejas 
(fire).3 

Opponent :  Since  fire  alone  is  mentioned  in  the  text,  “The 
vital  force  is  withdrawn  into  fire”,  how  can  it  be  asserted  that 
the  ruler  exists  amidst  the  elements  which  have  fire  as  an  asso¬ 
ciate? 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  aphorist  says, 

%  ii^ii 

Not  in  a  single  one  for  both  show 

(otherwise). 

6 .  (The  soul  does)  not  ( come  to  stay)  amidst  a  single  element , 
for  both  (the  Upanisads  and  Smrtis)  show  otherwise . 

It  is  not  a  fact  that  at  the  time  of  the  soul’s  desire  to  attain  a 
new  body  it  exists  in  the  midst  of  a  single  element,  viz  fire,  for 
the  gross  body  is  seen  to  be  formed  of  many  elements.  The 
question  and  answer  also  reveal  this  in  the  passage  starting  with, 
“Do  you  know  how  water  comes  to  be  called  man  when  the 
fifth  oblation  is  poured?”  (Ch.  V.  iii.  3).  That  fact  was  explained 
under  the  aphorism,  “On  account  of  water  being  constituted  by 
three  elements,  the  soul  goes  enveloped  by  all  of  them,  though 

3  So  “fire”  actually  means  the  subtle  elements,  or  rather  the  subtle  body, 
where  the  soul  subsists,  as  also  does  Prana  through  its  existence  in  the 
soul. 


854  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [  IV.  ii.  6 

water  is  mentioned  because  of  its  preponderance”  (B.  S.  III.  i. 
2).  The  Upani$adic  and  Smrti  texts  also  point  to  this.  The 
relevant  Upani$adic  text  runs  thus:  “That  Self  is  identified  with 
...earth,  water,  air,  space,  and  fire”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  5).  The  Smrti 
text  is,  “All  this  in  the  universe  emerges,  as  of  yore,  along  with 
the  five  subtle  elements  that  are  indestructible”  (Manu,  I.  21), 
and  so  on. 

Opponent :  With  regard  to  the  time  when  the  soul  wants  to 
acquire  a  new  body  after  the  organs  of  speech  etc.  are  with¬ 
drawn,  another  Upani$adic  passage  starts  with  the  sentence, 
“Where  is  the  man  then?”  (Bf.  III.  ii.  13),  and  then  decides 
that  the  soul  rests  on  the  results  of  past  works  (karma)  in  the 
text,  “What  they  mentioned  there  was  only  karma ,  and  what 
they  praised  there  was  also  only  karma ”  (ibid). 

Vedantin :  As  to  that  the  answer  is:  The  subject  dealt  with 
there  is  the  emergence  of  bondage  which  is  constituted  by  the 
senses  and  sense-objects,  called  the  grahas  (i.e.  perceivers)  and 
atigrahas  (i.e.  impellers  of  the  perceivers — i.e.  objects  of  percep¬ 
tion)  and  which  is  determined  by  past  works.  In  this  sense  it  is 
said  that  the  soul  rests  on  karma  (work).  But  the  subject  dealt 
with  here  is  the  creation  of  a  fresh  body  from  the  materials,  viz 
the  elements.  In  this  sense  it  is  said  that  it  rests  on  the  elements. 
Besides,  by  using  the  word  “praise”  in  the  other  text  (i.e. 
Bfhadaranyaka)  a  mere  predominance  of  karma  is  shown  there, 
and  it  is  not  that  any  other  resting  place  is  also  negated  thereby. 
Hence  there  is  no  contradiction. 

Topic  4:  Departure  of  the  Enlightened  and  the 
Unenlightened 

Doubt :  Is  this  departure  from  the  body  the  same  for  the 
enlightened  and  the  unenlightened  persons?  Or  is  there  any  dis¬ 
tinction? 

Opponent :  When  under  such  a  doubt,  the  conclusion  that  can 
be  arrived  at  is  that  this  departure  has  got  a  distinction,  inasmuch 
as  this  departure  occurs  in  conjunction  with  the  subtle  elements, 
and  it  is  for  rebirth  that  the  elements  are  resorted  to.  Moreover, 
there  can  be  no  rebirth  for  the  enlightened  man,  for  the 
Upani$ad  declares  that  the  man  of  knowledge  attains  immortal- 


IV.  ii.  73  BRAHMA -S0TRA-BHA5YA  855 

Icy.  Hence  this  departure  is  related  to  the  unenlightened  man 
alone. 

Objection :  Since  this  discussion  occurs  in  the  scripture  under 
the  topic  of  knowledge,  this  must  be  about  the  man  of  know¬ 
ledge. 

Opponent :  No,  since  this  departure  is  described  there  as  a 
fact  already  known  (or  a  matter  of  natural  occurrence)  just  like 
sleep  etc.  Just  as  even  in  a  context  of  knowledge,  sleep  etc., 
occurring  to  all  creatures,  are  described  in  such  texts  as,  “When 
a  man  comes  to  be  known  as  ‘He  sleeps’  ”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1),  “When 
he  comes  to  be  known  as  ‘He  wants  to  eat’”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  3), 
“When  he  comes  to  be  known  as  ‘He  wants  to  drink’  ”  (Ch. 
VI.  viii.  5);  and  this  is  done  so  because  this  is  helpful  to  the 
comprehension  of  the  subject  being  explained  but  not  for 
describing  the  man  of  knowledge  as  possessed  of  such  distinc¬ 
tions;  similarly  this  departure  from  the  body  that  is  common 
to  men  in  general  is  being  described  in  order  to  establish  the 
fact  that  the  supreme  Deity  in  which  the  fire  of  the  departing 
man  merges  is  the  Self  and  that  “Thou  art  That”.  Besides,  this 
departure  is  denied  in  the  case  of  a  man  of  knowledge  in,  “His 
organs  do  not  depart”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  6).  Therefore  this  departure 
is  of  the  unenlightened  man  alone. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  we  say. 

wm  nv9ii 

xf  And  (the  mode  of  departure  is)  the  same  3THjfo- 

up  to  the  beginning  of  the  path;  ^  and  the 

immortality  (is  relative)  spjqfar  without  burning  ignorance. 

7.  And  the  mode  of  departure  (at  the  time  of  death)  is  the 
same  ( for  the  blower  of  the  qualified  Br airman  and  the  ignorant 
man)  up  to  the  beginning  of  the  path  (of  the  gods);  and  the 
immortality  (that  is  spoken  of)  is  the  one  that  is  attained  without 
burning  ignorance . 

It  is  but  proper  that  the  departure  as  described  in  such  texts 
as,  “Speech  is  withdrawn  into  the  mind”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6),  should 


856  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  ii.  7 

be  “the  same  for  the  kno\ver  and  the  ignorant”  upto  the  point 
where  they  start  for  their  respective  separate  paths;  for  this  is 
spoken  of  without  any  distinctive  specification.  The  ignorant 
man  moves  on,  resting  on  the  subtle  elements  constituting  the 
seed  of  the  next  body  and  under  the  impulsion  of  his  past 
works,  for  the  sake  of  fresh  experiences  in  a  new  body.  But  the 
man  of  knowledge  pursues  the  path  through  the  nerve  (passing 
out  of  the  crown  of  the  head4  and)  lighted  up  by  knowledge 
and  leading  to  liberation.  This  fact  is  stated  in  the  aphorism  by 
saying,  “Up  to  the  beginning  of  the  path  (of  the  gods)”. 

Opponent :  The  enlightened  man  has  to  attain  immortality, 
which  does  not  depend  on  going  from  one  place  to  another;  so 
how  can  there  be  any  resort  to  the  elements  and  the  commence¬ 
ment  of  a  path? 

Veda?itin :  As  to  that,  the  answer  is  that  this  immortality  is 
relative  for  the  man  whose  blemishes  have  not  been  totally  burnt 
away — for  one  who  wants  to  attain  a  relative  immortality  by 
virtue  of  his  knowledge  of  the  qualified  Brahman  without  com¬ 
pletely  burning  away  his  ignorance.  In  such  a  case  both  reliance 
on  the  elements  and  the  commencement  of  a  path  are  possible. 
For  the  sense-organs  cannot  move  without  something  to  rest  on. 
Hence  there  is  no  fault. 

Topic  5:  Relative  Merger  of  Fire  etc. 

Doubt :  It  has  been  ascertained  in  accordance  with  the  context 
that  the  meaning  of  the  text,  “Fire  gets  withdrawn  into  the 
supreme  Deity”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  6),  is  that  the  fire  of  the  dying 
man,  which  is  under  consideration,  gets  merged  in  the  supreme 
Deity  along  with  the  ruler,  the  vital  force,  the  assemblage  of 
sense-organs,  and  the  other  elements.  Now  it  is  being  considered 
what  this  merger  actually  is. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  conclusion  arrived  at  is  that  the 
merger  is  absolute  and  of  the  thing  itself  in  its  entirety;  for 
that  is  the  reasonable  position  inasmuch  as  the  Deity  is  its 
material  cause.  For  it  has  been  established  earlier  that  the 

*  The  ignorant  move  through  the  other  inferior  nerves — this  is  the 
difference. 


IV.  ii.  9]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  857 

supreme  Deity  is  the  material  cause  of  all  things  that  are  born. 
Hence  this  attainment  of  identity  is  absolute  and  complete. 

Vedantin :  To  this  we  say. 

IFII 

^  That  (group  of  elements — fire  and  the  rest)  (continues) 
ajT-3pft^:  till  final  release  f°r  there  is  declaration 

of  the  transmigratory  state  (till  then). 

8 .  That  group  of  elements  ( counting  from  fire)  continues  till 
complete  liberation;  for  there  is  a  declaration  of  the  continuance 
of  the  transmigratory  state  till  then . 

“That”,  the  group  of  subtle  elements  counting  from  fire  that 
supplies  the  basis  for  the  organs  of  hearing  etc.,  “continues  till 
complete  liberation”,  till  liberation  from  the  transmigratory  state 
as  a  result  of  full  enlightenment;  for  the  state  of  transmigration 
is  described  thus  (for  the  ignorant  alone):  “Some  souls  enter  the 
womb  for  acquiring  bodies  and  others  follow  the  motionless  in 
accordance  with  their  (past)  works  and  in  conformity  with 
their  knowledge”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  7).  On  a  contrary  supposition  all 
would  become  Brahman  in  an  absolute  sense,  since  at  the  time 
of  death  their  limiting  adjuncts  would  become  extinct.  In  that 
case  all  scriptures  of  injunction  would  be  useless,  as  also  all 
scriptures  about  knowledge.  Moreover,  the  bondage  that  arises 
from  false  ignorance  cannot  be  removed  by  anything  apart  from 
full  enlightenment.  Accordingly,  though  Brahman  is  the  material 
cause,  still  the  merger  in  Existence  (Brahman)  at  death  occurs 
in  such  a  way  as  to  ensure  the  continuance  of  these  (organs  etc.) 
in  a  latent  state  (so  that  they  can  re-emerge)  just  as  it  happens 
during  deep  sleep  and  dissolution. 

^  And  minute  in  (its)  size  (or  measure) 

such  being  the  experience. 

9.  That  fire  (as  also  other  elements )  is  minute  in  its  nature , 
as  also  in  size,  because  it  is  seen  to  be  so. 


858  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  ii.  9 

And  that  fire  along  with  the  other  elements,  which  constitute 
a  habitat  for  the  soul  emerging  out  of  its  present  body,  must 
be  subtle  in  nature  and  measure.  It  is  thus  that  we  gather  from 
the  Upani$adic  declaration  about  its  going  out  through  the 
nerves  that  fire  (as  also  the  other  elements)  is  a  subtle  element. 
It  is  possible  for  it  to  move  through  the  nerves  because  of  its 
minuteness  in  size,  and  it  is  unobstructed  because  of  its  fineness 
by  nature.  It  is  because  of  this  fact  again  that  it  is  not  perceived 
by  people  near  by  when  it  departs  from  the  body. 

\\\o\\ 

Not  (is  the  subtle  one  destroyed)  by  the  destruc¬ 

tion  (of  the  gross  body)  srt:  for  this  reason. 

10.  For  this  (very)  reason  the  subtle  body  is  not  destroyed 
even  when  the  gross  one  is. 

“For  this  very  reason”,  just  because  it  is  subtle,  the  other  body, 
“the  subtle  body”,  “is  not  destroyed,  even  when  the  gross  body 
is  destroyed”  through  cremation  etc. 

3S*TT  HUH 

This  warmth  belongs  to  this  (subtle  body) 
it 3*  to  be  sure  ^qq^:  for  that  stands  to  reason. 

11.  And  this  warmth  belongs  to  this  subtle  body  to  be  sure , 
for  that  stands  to  reason . 

The  warmth  that  people  feel  by  touching  a  living  body 
“belongs  to  this”  one,  to  the  “subtle  body,  to  be  sure”.  Thus  it 
is  that  when  death  takes  place  and  the  body  still  persists,  heat 
is  not  perceived  even  though  the  other  attributes  of  the  body 
like  form  etc.  persist;  but  it  is  perceived  only  when  the  body 
is  alive.  Hence  it  stands  to  reason  that  this  heat  belongs  to  some¬ 
thing  other  than  the  well-known  gross  body.  In  support  of  this 
occurs  the  Vedic  text,  “It  is  warm  indeed  so  long  as  it  lives, 
and  cold  when  it  dies”. 


IV. ii.  12]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 

Topic  6:  No  Departure  for  a  Knower  of  Brahman 


859 


sfdtolfcfa  \\\\\\ 

(The  organs  do  not  depart)  because  of  the  (scrip¬ 
tural)  denial  if  it  be  argued  thus,  then  not  so;  (for 

the  denial  means  that  they  do  not  depart)  from  the 

individual  soul. 

12.  If  it  be  contended  that  the  organs  of  the  man  of  knowledge 
do  not  depart  from  the  body  because  of  the  denial  in  the  scrip - 
ture ,  then  (according  to  the  opponent)  it  is  not  so ,  for  the  denial 
is  about  the  departure  from  the  individual  soul. 

From  the  reservation  made  under  the  aphorism,  “And  the 
immortality  spoken  of  is  one  that  is  attained  without  burning 
ignorance”  (IV.  ii.  7),  it  is  admitted  that  in  the  absolute  immor¬ 
tality  there  is  an  absence  of  any  course  to  be  followed  and  any 
departure  from  the  body.  Still  lest  there  be  any  apprehension 
of  departure  owing  to  some  reason  or  other,  that  is  denied 
through  the  text,  “But  the  man  who  does  not  desire  (never 
transmigrates).  Of  him  who  is  without  desires,  who  is  free  from 
desires,  the  objects  of  whose  desire  have  been  obtained,  and  to 
whom  all  objects  of  desire  are  but  the  Self — the  organs  do  not 
depart.  Being  but  Brahman  he  is  merged  in  Brahman”  (Bj\  IV 
iv.  6).  Now  since  this  denial  occurs  in  the  context  of  the 
supreme  knowledge,  the  organs  of  the  man  who  has  realized 
the  supreme  Brahman  have  no  departure  from  the  body. 

The  reply  (to  this  by  the  opponent )  is:  No,  since  this  “denial 
is  concerned  with  the  departure  of  the  organs  from  the 
embodied  one”,  and  not  from  the  body. 

Objectio? 2 :  How  is  this  known  (that  the  organs  depart  not 
from  the  body  but  from  the  embodied  entity)? 

Opponent :  Because  in  the  other  (Madhyandina)  branch  the 
fifth  case-ending  is  used  (in  tasmdt — from  him).  Since  the  sixth 
case-ending  (in  tasya — of  him)  (in  the  Kdnva  recension)  is  used 
to  imply  relationships  in  general,  it  can  be  delimited  to  a  partic¬ 
ular  relationship  on  the  strength  of  the  ablative  (fifth  case- 


860  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  ii.  12 

ending)  (in  tasmat)  in  the  other  ( Madhyandina )  recension.  And 
by  the  word  tasmat  (from  him)  the  embodied  soul  that  is 
qualified  for  secular  prosperity  or  liberation  is  referred  to,  for  it 
is  the  chief  subject  (of  the  context),  but  not  so  is  the  body 
referred  to.  The  idea  implied  is  this:  “From  him”,  from  the 
individual  soul,  that  is  about  to  depart  from  the  body,  the  organs 
do  not  depart;  they  remain  in  its  company.  When  the  soul 
departs,  it  departs  from  the  body  along  with  the  organs. 

Vedantin  :  This  being  the  position,  it  is  being  refuted: 

(This  is  not  so)  because  tr%qr^  in  the  case  of  the  fol¬ 
lowers  of  one  branch,  (there  is)  a  clear  (denial  of  the 

soul’s  departure  from  the  body). 

13 .  This  is  not  so,  for  in  case  of  the  followers  of  one  recen¬ 
sion  there  is  a  clear  denial  of  the  souVs  departure . 

The  assertion  was  made  to  the  effect  that  even  for  the  man 
who  knows  Brahman  there  can  be  such  a  fact  as  departure  from 
the  body,  the  denial  of  departure  having  been  made  about  the 
departure  (of  the  organs)  from  the  embodied  soul.  This  is  not 
correct,  for  the  denial  of  the  departure  (of  the  organs)  from 
the  body  is  clearly  met  with  in  a  particular  recension.  Thus  in 
the  course  of  answering  the  question  of  Artabhaga,  “When  this 
one  (i.e.  the  body  of  the  liberated  man)  dies,  do  the  organs  then 
go  up  from  this  one,  or  do  they  not?”  it  is  stated  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  departure  (from  the  body).  “‘No,’  replied 
Yajnavalkya”  (Bj\  III.  ii.  11).  Then  since  the  misconception 
might  arise  that  in  that  case  this  one  does  not  die  because  the 
organs  do  not  depart,  the  assertion  of  the  merger  of  the  organs 
is  made  in,  “they  merge  in  this  one  only”  (ibid);  and  for  estab¬ 
lishing  this  fact  it  is  said,  “This  one  swells,  this  one  is  inflated, 
and  in  that  state  lies  dead”  (ibid),  where  swelling  etc.  are 
asserted  about  something  that  is  referred  to  by  “this  one”  ( sah ) 
that  is  under  discussion  and  that  forms  the  basis  from  which 
the  departure  can  occur.  Such  descriptions  fit  in  with  the  body 


IV.  ii.  13]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  861 

and  not  the  embodied  soul.5  In  conformity  with  this,  the  text 
that  has  a  reading  with  the  fifth  case-ending,  viz  “The  organs 
do  not  depart  from  this  one,  they  merge  in  this  one  only” 
( Madhyandina  reading),  has  to  be  interpreted  to  mean  that 
though  the  embodied  soul  is  primarily  alluded  to  by  the  pronoun 
(this  one),  still  the  denial  is  concerned  with  the  departure  from 
the  body  that  is  figuratively  identified  with  the  embodied  soul. 
But  in  the  case  of  those  (of  the  Kanva  recension)  who  have  the 
reading  (“of  this  one”)  with  the  sixth  case-ending,  the  departure 
is  denied  in  relation  to  the  man  of  knowledge,  so  that  the  denial 
in  that  sentence  is  concerned  with  the  departure  as  it  is  well 
known  (in  the  world);  and  what  is  a  well-known  fact  is  the 
departure  from  the  body  and  not  from  the  embodied  soul,  so 
that  the  denial  comes  to  mean  the  denial  of  the  departure  (of  the 
organs)  from  the  body.  Moreover,  the  departure  of  the  ignorant 
man  from  the  body  and  his  course  of  transmigration  are  de¬ 
scribed  elaborately  in  the  text,  “The  soul  departs  either  through 
the  eyes  or  through  the  head  or  through  any  other  part  of  the 
body.  When  it  departs,  all  the  organs  follow”  etc.  (Bj%  IV.  iv. 
2).  That  topic  of  the  ignorant  man  is  ended  with,  “Thus  does 
the  man  transmigrate  who  desires”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  6).  Then  the 
man  of  knowledge  is  mentioned  thus,  “But  the  man  who  does 
not  desire”  (ibid).  Now,  should  the  (latter)  text  mean  that  the 
departure  from  the  body  (in  the  earlier  text)  is  meant  for  him 
as  well,  then  this  separate  mention  becomes  incongruous.  Hence 
to  make  this  separate  mention  purposeful,  the  text  is  to  be 
explained  to  signify  the  denial  of  the  departure  and  the  follow¬ 
ing  of  a  course  in  the  case  of  a  man  of  knowledge,  though  they 
are  but  natural  to  a  man  of  ignorance.  Besides,  it  is  unreasonable 
that  a  man  who  has  known  Brahman  and  become  identified  with 
the  all-pervasive  Brahman  and  has  his  desires  and  results  of 
kan na  annihilated  should  depart  or  have  any  course  to  follow, 
for  there  is  no  rhyme  or  reason  for  that.  And  texts  like,  “Attains 
Brahman  in  this  very  body”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  7)  indicate  the  absence 
of  departure  and  paths  for  him. 

5 Even  though  the  word  used  is  purusa  (man),  it  means  the  body;  for 
the  soul  cannot  have  swelling  etc.  that  are  stated  about  it  by  referring 
to  it  by  the  term  “this  one”. 


862  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.ii.14 

^  ll?V|| 

14.  And  the  Smrti  also  says  so. 

Moreover,  the  absence  of  movement  and  departure  is  men¬ 
tioned  in  th e  Mahabhdrata :  “Even  gods  become  befooled  in  the 
course  of  finding  out  the  path  of  one  who  has  become  one  with 
the  Self  of  all  beings,  who  has  understood  all  beings  truly  as 
the  Self,  and  who  has  no  state  to  reach.” 

Opponent :  But  the  Smrti  also  mentions  a  path  that  the 
knowers  of  Brahman  tread:  “Once  upon  a  time  Suka,  son  of 
Vyasa,  became  desirous  of  liberation  and  proceeded  towards  the 
solar  orb.  When  called  back  by  his  father  who  was  following 
him,  he  responded  saying,  ‘Sir’ 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  it  is  to  be  understood  that  Suka  reached 
a  particular  region  through  his  power  of  Yoga  even  while  he  was 
in  the  body,  and  there  he  gave  it  up.  For  such  facts  as  being  seen 
by  all  beings  are  mentioned  in  that  connection,  whereas  nobody 
can  have  any  visual  perception  when  a  disembodied  soul  moves 
on.  It  is  in  line  with  this  that  in  that  very  context  the  conclusion 
is  made  thus:  “But  Suka  accelerated  his  speed  to  more  than  that 
of  wind,  moved  across  space  exhibiting  his  own  power,  and  then 
he  became  merged  in  all  beings”.  Hence  the  knower  of  Brahman 
has  neither  any  departure  from  the  body  nor  any  course  to 
follow.  We  shall  state  later  on  as  to  whom  the  Upani$adic  texts 
about  courses  refer  (IV.  iii.  7). 

Topic  7:  The  Organs  of  the  Knower  Merge  in  Brahman 

arfr  qft  m\  uwii 

aifa  Those  (organs)  (merge)  in  the  supreme  Brahman 

because  so  (the  Upani§ad)  says. 

15.  Those  organs  get  merged  in  the  supreme  Brahman ,  for 
such  is  the  declaration  of  the  Upani$ad. 

And  “those  organs”,  called  the  pranas ,  as  also  the  (subtle) 
elements,  of  the  knower  of  the  supreme  Brahman  “merge  in  the 
supreme”  Self. 

Why  is  it  so? 


IV.  ii.  16]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  863 

Since  “such  is  the  declaration  of  the  Upani$ad”  (as  in):  “So 
also  these  sixteen  parts  (i.e.  limbs)  of  the  all-seeing  Purufa  (i.e. 
infinite  Being)  that  have  Purusa  as  their  abode  get  absorbed  on 
reaching  Puru$a"  (Pr.  VI.  5). 

Opponent :  Another  Upani$adic  text,  speaking  about  the  man 
of  realization,  states  that  the  “parts”  get  merged  somewhere 
other  than  the  supreme  Self:  “To  their  sources  repair  the  fifteen 
parts  (constituents  of  the  body)”  (Mu.  III.  ii.  7). 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  this  (Muncjaka)  text  speaks  from  the 
phenomenal  point  of  view,  and  it  means  that  the  constituents 
that  are  the  products  of  the  elements — earth  etc. — repair  to  their 
own  material  sources.  But  the  other  (Prasna)  text  states  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  man  of  realization  that  (in  his  view)  all 
the  constituents  get  absorbed  in  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself. 
Hence  there  is  no  defect. 

Topic  8:  Absolute  Absorption  of  the  Constituents 

Doubt :  Does  the  merger  of  the  constituents  of  the  body  of 
the  man  of  realization  occur  wholly  as  in  the  case  of  others,  or 
is  some  part  left  out? 

Opponent :  Since  that  is  a  resorption  like  any  other  resorption, 
their  potentiality  must  remain  intact. 

Vedantin  :  To  this  the  aphorist  says, 

arfinrmt  \\\\\\ 

3T-fa?TFT:  Non-distinction  (with  Brahman  results)  on 

the  authority  of  scriptural  declaration. 

16.  ( Absolute )  non-distinction  (with  Brahman  comes  about) 
on  the  authority  of  the  scriptural  declaration . 

It  is  a  total  unification  to  be  sure. 

Why  so? 

“On  the  authority  of  the  scriptural  declaration”.  Thus  it  is 
that  after  relating  the  merger  of  the  constituents,  the  Upani§ad 
says,  “When  their  names  and  forms  are  destroyed  and  they  are 
simply  called  Purusa.  Such  a  man  of  realization  is  without  the 
constituents  and  is  immortal”  (Pr.  VI.  5).  Besides,  the  consti¬ 
tuents  that  spring  from  ignorance  can  have  no  remnant  after 


864  BRAHMA-SOTRA-BHA$YA  [IV.ii.16 

their  resorption  through  knowledge.  Accordingly,  they  must 
become  absolutely  unified  (with  Brahman). 

Topic  9:  Departure  of  One  who  Knows  the 
Qualified  Brahman 

zfPrra  ^Rnfwn  ii?v9ii 

There  occurs  an  illumination  of  the  top 
of  its  (i.e.  soul’s)  abode  (viz  the  heart); 
having  the  door  illumined  by  that  (light),  (the  soul  goes  out),, 
owing  to  the  efficacy  of  knowledge  ^  and 

owing  to  the  appropriateness  of  the  constant 
meditation  about  the  way  which  is  a  part  of  that  (knowledge), 
under  the  favour  of  Him  who  resides  in  the  heart, 
STcT-srfsR^r  through  that  (nerve)  which  is  the  hundred  and  first. 

17.  (When  the  soul  of  the  man  who  has  realized  the  qualified 
Brahman  is  about  to  depart ),  there  occurs  an  illumination  of  the 
top  of  the  heart.  Having  that  door  illumined  by  that  light ,  the 
souly  under  the  favour  of  Him  who  resides  in  the  hearty  departs 
through  the  hundred  and  first  nerve ,  owing  to  the  efficacy  of 
the  knowledge  and  the  appropriateness  of  the  constant  thought 
about  the  course  which  is  a  part  of  that  knowledge. 

Doubt :  The  incidental  consideration  of  the  knowledge  of  the 
supreme  Brahman  is  concluded.  Now,  however,  the  aphorist 
pursues  the  reflections  about  the  inferior  knowledge.  It  has  been 
stated  that  the  process  of  departure  from  the  body  is  the  same 
for  the  man  of  knowledge  (i.e.  of  one  who  meditates  on  the 
qualified  Brahman)  and  the  man  of  ignorance  up  to  the  point 
where  the  path  of  the  gods  begins.  Now  is  being  considered  the 
entry  (of  the  soul)  into  that  course.  When  the  soul,  identified 
with  the  intellect,  that  has  all  its  organs  counting  from  the 
organ  of  speech  withdrawn  into  itself,  is  about  to  leave  the 
body,  then  the  heart  becomes  its  abode,  the  place  of  its  existence, 
in  accordance  with  the  Upani$adic  text,  “Completely  with¬ 
drawing  these  particles  of  light  (i.e.  powers  of  the  organs),  it 
comes  to  the  heart”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  1).  The  illumination  of  the  top 


IV. ii.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  865 

of  the  heart  and  the  departure  from  such  bases  as  the  eye  after 
that  top  becomes  lighted  up  are  mentioned  by  the  Upani$ad  in 
the  passage,  “The  top  of  the  heart  of  this  one  brightens.  Through 
that  brightened  top  the  soul  departs,  either  through  the  eyes  or 
through  the  head,  or  through  any  other  part  of  the  body”  (Bj\ 
IV.  iv.  2).  Now  does  this  departure  occur  in  the  same  way  both 
in  the  cases  of  the  enlightened  and  the  unenlightened,  or  is  there 
any  distinction  in  the  case  of  the  enlightened? 

Opponent :  When  under  such  a  doubt,  the  conclusion  should 
be  that  there  is  no  distinction,  for  the  Upani$adic  text  is  the 
same. 

Veddntin:  That  being  the  position,  the  aphorist  says  that 
though  the  top  of  the  heart  becomes  illumined  both  for  the 
man  of  knowledge  and  the  man  of  ignorance,  and  though  the 
door  is  illumined  thereby,  yet  the  man  of  knowledge  departs 
from  the  region  of  the  head,  whereas  the  others  depart  from 
other  regions. 

Why? 

Because  of  the  power  of  knowledge.  Should  the  man  of 
knowledge  also  depart  from  any  region  indiscriminately  just 
like  the  others,  he  will  not  attain  a  virtuous  world,  so  that  his 
knowledge  will  be  useless.  And  this  is  so  “because  of  the  appro¬ 
priateness  of  constant  thought  about  the  course  forming  a  part 
of  the  knowledge”.  In  connection  with  certain  meditations  it  is 
enjoined  that  the  soul’s  path  that  is  associated  with  the  nerve  at 
the  top  of  the  head  and  forms  a  part  of  the  meditation  itself  has 
to  be  reflected  on.  And  it  is  reasonable  that  by  virtue  of  thinking 
on  it  he  should  emerge  through  that  very  thing.  Therefore  the 
man  of  knowledge,  favoured  as  he  is  by  Brahman  which  is 
meditated  on  as  having  Its  abode  in  the  heart,  becomes  unified 
in  thought  with  Brahman  and  emerges  out  of  the  body  through 
the  nerve  counted  as  the  one  over  and  above  a  hundred;  but 
others  emerge  through  other  nerves.  That  is  why  it  is  stated  in 
the  scripture  in  connection  with  the  meditation  about  the  heart, 
“The  nerves  of  the  heart  are  a  hundred  and  one  in  number.  Of 
them  the  one  passes  through  the  head.  Going  up  through  that 
nerve  one  gets  immortality.  Other  nerves  that  have  different 
55 


866  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  ii.  17 

directions  become  the  causes  of  death”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  16,  Ch.  VIII. 
vi.  6). 

Topic  10:  The  Soul  Follows  the  Rays  of  the  Sun 

m«ii 

By  following  the  rays  (of  the  sun). 

18.  (The  soul  of  the  man  of  knowledge)  proceeds  by  follow¬ 
ing  the  rays  of  the  sun. 

Starting  with  the  sentence,  “Now  then,  there  is  the  palace  of 
Brahman  in  the  shape  of  the  tiny  lotus  of  the  heart  that  is 
within  the  body;  in  that  exists  (Brahman  called)  the  small  inner 
Space”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.- 1),  a  meditation  about  the  heart  is  enjoined. 
In  the  course  of  describing  this  meditation,  the  start  is  made 
with,  “Now  these  nerves  of  the  heart”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  1),  and 
then  a  connection  is  elaborately  shown  between  the  nerves  (in 
the  heart)  and  the  rays  (of  the  sun)  in  the  passage,  “Then  when 
anyone  departs  from  this  body  thus,  he  goes  up  along  these 
rays”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  5),  and  again  it  is  stated,  “Going  up  through 
that  nerve  one  gets  immortality”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  6).  From  this  it 
is  known  that  the  soul,  while  emerging  through  the  hundred 
and  first  nerve,  goes  out  along  the  rays. 

Now  the  doubt  arises  as  to  whether  the  soul  follows  the  rays 
equally,  irrespective  of  the  occurrence  of  the  death  during  the 
day-time  or  night,  or  it  does  so  only  when  dying  in  the  day¬ 
time. 

Vedantin:  This  being  the  doubt,  the  aphorist  declares  that 
the  soul  progresses  by  the  way  of  the  rays  irrespective  of  the 
time  of  death,  for  the  Upani$ad  speaks  in  general  terms. 

ssrofa  =??  nun 

fq%  In  the  night  q-  there  is  no  (progress  along  the  rays) 
if  it  be  argued  thus,  then  ^  not  so, 
since  there  is  a  continuance  as  long  as  the  body  lasts 
of  the  relationship  (between  the  nerve  and  the  rays);  also 
qtfqfd  the  Upani$ad  reveals  this. 


IV.  ii.  19] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


867 


19.  If  it  be  argued  that  the  soul  departing  at  night  can  have 
no  progress  along  the  rays ,  then  it  is  not  so,  since  the  connection 
between  the  nerve  and  the  rays  continues  as  long  as  the  body 
lasts;  and  this  is  revealed  in  the  Upani$ad. 

Opponent :  The  nerve  and  the  sun’s  rays  remain  connected 
during  the  day,  so  that  a  man  dying  in  the  day  may  well  follow 
the  rays  (in  his  upward  course);  but  that  is  not  possible  for  a 
man  dying  at  night  because  the  connection  between  the  nerve 
and  the  rays  is  then  snapped. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  the  connection  between  the  nerve  and 
the  rays  lasts  as  long  as  the  body  itself,  for  the  nerve  and  the 
rays  remain  in  association  as  long  as  the  embodied  state  contin¬ 
ues;  (the  connection  is  not  broken  by  night).  This  fact  is 
revealed  by  the  Upani$ad  in,  “Extending  from  that  solar  orb 
they  (the  rays)  enter  into  the  nerves,  and  spreading  out  from 
the  nerves  they  enter  the  solar  orb”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  2).  In  summer 
the  presence  of  the  rays,  even  during  nights,  is  perceived  from 
their  effect  of  producing  heat  etc.  If  it  is  difficult  to  perceive 
them  during  the  nights  in  other  seasons,  it  is  because  they  are 
present  in  very  small  measures  even  as  they  are  in  cloudy  days 
during  winter.  The  text,  “The  sun  makes  of  it  a  day  even  at 
night”,  reveals  this  very  fact.  Were  a  man,  dying  at  night,  to 
proceed  upward  even  without  following  the  rays,  the  pursuit 
of  the  rays  itself  would  become  useless.  The  Upani$ad  does  not 
mention  separately  that  those  who  die  in  the  day-time  proceed 
upward  by  following  the  rays,  while  those  who  die  at  night  do 
so  without  depending  on  the  rays.  On  the  contrary  if  it  be 
supposed  that  even  a  man  of  knowledge  cannot  proceed  upward 
owing  to  the  offence  of  his  dying  at  night,  then  the  fruit  of 
knowledge  will  become  uncertain,  so  that  men  will  have  no 
inducement  to  it,  for  one  cannot  regulate  the  time  of  one’s 
death.  It  cannot  be  that  a  soul  that  has  become  detached  from 
the  body  at  night,  must  wait  till  day  dawns;  for  even  when  day 
dawns,  its  body  may  not  come  in  contact  with  the  solar  rays, 
it  (the  body)  having  been  already  consigned  to  fire  etc.  The 
text,  “In  the  little  time  that  the  mind  takes  to  travel  from  one 
object  to  another,  the  man  of  knowledge  reaches  the  sun”  (Ch. 


868  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.  ii.  19 

VIII.  vi.  5),  also  shows  that  there  is  no  waiting  (for  daybreak). 
Therefore  the  soul’s  pursuit  of  the  rays  is  the  same  whether  it 
departs  at  night  or  in  the  day. 

Topic  11:  Soul’s  Journey  During  the  Sun’s  Southern  Course 

3rrT«npFtefa  sfaor  iroii 

3RT:  ^  For  the  same  reason  3fPr  even  (when  dying)  gftpT  3T3% 
during  the  southern  course  of  the  sun  (the  soul  gets  the  fruits 
of  knowledge). 

20.  For  the  very  same  reason  (the  soul  gets  the  result  of 
knowledge)  even  when  departing  during  the  sunys  southern 
course. 

Just  because  of  this — because  there  is  no  need  for  waiting, 
because  the  result  of  knowledge  is  not  uncertain,  and  because 
the  time  of  death  is  unpredictable — if  a  man  of  knowledge 
should  die  during  the  southward  course  of  the  sun,  he  will  get 
the  result  of  his  knowledge  all  the  same.  By  this  aphorism  the 
aphorist  demolishes  the  misconception  about  the  necessity  of 
waiting  till  the  sun  starts  northward  that  may  arise  from  the 
facts  that  the  sanctity  of  the  northern  course  is  well  recognized, 
that  Bhl$ma  is  known  to  have  waited  for  it,  and  that  the  Upa- 
ni$ad  says,  “From  the  bright  fortnight  he  goes  to  the  six  months 
during  which  the  sun  moves  northward”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5).  The 
well-known  sanctity  is  a  fact  in  relation  to  the  men  of  ignorance. 
As  for  Bhl$ma’s  waiting  for  departure  during  the  northern 
course,  it  was  by  way  of  showing  respect  to  popular  sentiment 
and  demonstrating  the  validity  of  his  father’s  boon  that  his  death 
would  be  at  his  own  command.  As  for  the  meaning  of  the 
Upani§adic  text,  it  will  be  explained  under  the  aphorism,  “These 
are  deities  conducting  the  soul  for  there  are  indicatory  marks 
to  that  effect”  (B.  S.  IV.  iii.  4). 

Opponent :  In  the  Smfti  the  start  is  made  with  the  verse, 
“Now  I  shall  tell  thee,  O  thou  mightiest  of  the  Bharatas,  of  the 
time  travelling  in  which,  the  Yogins  return,  (and  again  of  that 
taking  which)  they  do  not  return”  (Gita,  VIII.  23),  and  then 
the  special  times  like  day,  calculated  to  lead  to  cessation  from 


IV.ii.21]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  869 

rebirth,  are  defined  in  the  main;  so  how  can  a  man  departing  at 
night  or  during  the  southern  course  of  the  sun  be  freed  from 
rebirth? 

Vedantin :  As  to  that,  the  answer  is: 

qtfor:  sri%  ^  to  ir?ii 

^  And  (these  times  etc.)  are  mentioned  in  the  Smrti 

iftfiTff:  srfff  for  the  Yogins-,  and  these  two  (Samkhya  and 
Yoga  paths)  are  mentioned  in  the  Smrti  (and  not  the 

Vedas). 

27.  And  these  times  etc .  are  mentioned  in  the  Smrti  for  the 
Yogins;  and  these  (paths  of)  Samkhya  and  Yoga  are  mentioned 
in  the  Sntftis  and  not  the  Vedas. 

These  limitations  of  time  etc.  as  leading  to  the  cessation  of 
rebirth  are  mentioned  in  the  Smjtis  for  the  Yogins .  These  (paths 
of  Yoga  and  Samkhya 6  belong  to  the  Smjtis  and  not  to  the 
Vedas.  Thus  owing  to  a  difference  of  the  subject-matters  and 
the  special  qualifications  of  the  people  following  them,  the 
fixation  of  time  found  in  the  Smftis  is  not  to  be  applied  to  the 
Upani$adic  context. 

Opponent :  The  paths  of  the  gods  and  the  manes,  just  as  they 
are  presented  in  the  Upani$ads,  can  be  recognized  as  recounted 
in  the  Smttis  as  well:  “Fire,  flame,  day-time,  the  bright  fortnight, 
the  six  months  of  the  northern  passage  of  the  sun. . . .  Smoke, 
night-time,  the  dark  fortnight,  the  six  months  of  the  southern 
passage  of  the  sun”  (Gita,  VIII.  24-25). 

Vedantin  :  The  answer  is  that  since  a  promise  about  the  time 
is  made  thus  in  the  Smrti,  “I  shall  tell  thee  of  the  time”  (Gita, 
VIII.  23),  therefore  the  aphorist  apprehends  a  contradiction 
and  so  shows  how  that  can  be  resolved.  In  reality,  there  will 
be  no  contradiction  in  the  Smrti  as  well  if  there  too  the  gods 
conducting  the  souls  are  meant  by  those  terms  (as  they  are  in 
fact  in  the  Upani$ads). 

#  Y oga  means  the  performance  of  the  obligatory  daily  duties  like 
Awiihotra  as  an  offering  to  God;  Samkhya  means  a  feeling  of  not  being 
the  agent  of  any  work  (vide  Gita).  Both  these  are  different  from  the 
Upanisadic  meditation. 


Section  III 


Topic  1 :  Only  One  Path  to  the  World  of  Brahman 

Doubt :  It  was  stated  that  up  to  the  point  where  the  path  (of 
the  gods)  starts,  the  order  of  departure  from  the  body  is  similar. 
But  the  path  itself  is  variously  described  in  the  various  Upani$ads. 
One  course  starts  from  the  association  of  the  nerves  and  rays: 
“Then  he  rises  up  along  these  very  rays”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  5). 
Another  starts  with  the  flame:  “They  reach  (the  deity  identified 
with)  the  flame,  from  the  flame  (to  the  deity  of)  the  day”  (Br. 
VI.  ii.  15).  There  is  another  course  stated  in:  “Reaching  the  path 
of  the  gods,  he  comes  to  the  world  of  Fire”  (Kau.  I.  3).  Yet 
another  is:  “When  a  man  departs  from  this  world,  he  reaches 
the  air”  (Br.  V.  x.  1).  Still  another  is:  “Free  from  all  contamina¬ 
tions  they  go  by  the  path  of  the  sun  to  where  lives  that  Purufa , 
immortal  and  undecaying”  (Mu.  I.  ii.  11).  Now  the  doubt  arises: 
Are  these  paths  different  from  one  another,  or  are  they  the  same 
one  with  many  features? 

Opponent :  When  in  such  a  predicament,  the  conclusion  to 
be  drawn  is  that  these  paths  are  certainly  different  on  account 
of  their  occurring  in  different  contexts  and  forming  the  append¬ 
ages  of  diverse  meditations.  Moreover,  the  categorical  assertion 
in,  “Then  along  these  very  rays”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  5),  will  be 
nullified  if  the  flame  etc.  (of  Br.  VI.  ii.  15)  are  taken  into 
consideration.  Also  the  text  about  quickness,  contained  in,  “He 
reaches  the  sun  as  quickly  as  it  takes  the  mind  to  move  from 
one  object  to  another”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  5),  will  be  compromised. 
Therefore  these  paths  must  be  different  from  one  another. 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  say, 

3fa<if<Hl  11*11 

3rf%:-3nfe'TT  Along  the  path  starting  from  flame  (i.e.  light) 
that  being  well  known. 

1.  The  soul  travels  along  the  path  starting  from  flame,  that 
being  well  known. 


IV.iii.l]  BRAHMA -SCTR A -BHA§YA  871 

We  assert  that  all  who  would  reach  Brahman  have  to  proceed 
along  the  path  starting  from  flame. 

Why  so? 

“That  being  well  known,”  that  path  being  well  known  to  all 
men  of  realization.  Thus  it  is  that  in  the  text,  “And  those  others 
as  well  who  meditate  with  faith  upon  the  Satya  Brahman  in  the 
forest  (reach  the  deity  identified  with  flame)”  (Bj\  VI.  ii.  15), 
occurring  in  a  context  dealing  with  the  meditation  on  the  five 
fires,  we  hear  of  the  progress  along  the  path  starting  from  flame 
even  in  the  case  of  those  who  practise  other  kinds  of  meditation. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  in  the  case  of  those  medita¬ 
tions  where  no  course  is  mentioned,  this  course  starting  from 
flame  will  find  its  scope.  But  in  the  cases  where  other  courses 
arc  mentioned,  why  should  one  resort  to  this  course  starting 
from  flame? 

Vedantin  :  To  this  the  reply  is  that  this  might  have  been  so 
if  these  courses  were  totally  disparate.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
however,  this  course  leading  to  the  world  of  Brahman  is  the 
same  though  possessed  of  diverse  features  and  indicated  in  certain 
places  through  a  few  of  these  characteristics  only.  This  is  what 
wc  maintain.  Since  in  all  the  descriptions,  the  particulars  can 
be  recognized  as  so  many  aspects  of  the  same  path,  therefore 
these  can  be  comprised  in  a  single  conception  by  considering 
them  as  inter-related  in  a  successive  series  of  attributes  and 
substantives.  Just  as  in  the  case  of  a  meditation  occurring  in 
different  contexts,  the  different  aspects  have  to  be  collected  into 
a  single  whole,  similarly  the  characteristics  of  the  path  also  have 
to  be  integrated.  Although  the  meditations  may  differ,  the  path 
must  be  the  same,  since  it  is  recognized  that  it  is  an  aspect  of 
the  same  path  that  is  present  in  a  particular  case  and  since  the 
goal  to  be  reached  is  the  same  for  all.  Thus  it  is  that  in  the 
different  contexts  the  very  same  result,  viz  the  attainment  of 
the  world  of  Brahman,  is  shown  in  the  texts,  “They  attain  per¬ 
fection  and  live  in  those  worlds  of  Brahman  for  a  great  many 
superfine  years”  (Bf.  VI.  ii.  15),  “He  lives  there  (in  the  world 
that  is  free  from  grief  and  cold)  for  eternal  years”  (Bj\  V.  x.  1), 
“He  attains  the  same  victory  (everywhere)  and  the  same  per¬ 
vasiveness  that  Brahman  (Hiranyagarbha)  has”  (Kau.  1. 4),  “Those 


872 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


.[IV.iii.l 


who  attain  this  world  of  Brahman  through  Brahmacharyd ’  (Ch. 
VIII.  iv.  3).  As  for  the  contention  that  the  categorical  assertion 
in,  “along  these  very  rays”,  (Ch.  VIII.  vi.  5),  will  be  stultified 
if  the  path  starting  from  flame  be  accepted,  that  creates  little 
difficulty,  since  that  text  is  meant  merely  to  imply  the  attainment 
of  the  rays.1  For  a  single  word  “very”  cannot  posit  the  attain¬ 
ment  of  the  rays  and  also  the  rejection  of  the  flame.  Hence  it 
is  to  be  understood  that  this  text  merely  emphasizes  the  connec¬ 
tion  with  the  rays.  And  the  text  about  quickness  (Ch.  VIII. 
vi.  5)  is  not  compromised  even  if  the  path  starts  from  flame,  for 
what  is  meant  to  imply  is  that  in  comparison  with  other  goals, 
Brahman  is  reached  more  quickly;  and  this  is  just  as  one  might 
say,  “I  shall  reach  here  in  a  trice.”  Moreover,  the  text,  “They 
(i.e.  the  creatures  averse  to  scriptural  duties)  do  not  proceed 
along  either  of  these  two  paths”  (Ch.  V.  x.  8),  which  enumerates 
a  third  state,  shows  that  apart  from  the  path  of  the  manes  there 
is  only  another  path,  viz  that  of  the  gods,  which  is  divided  into 
the  stages  of  flame  etc.  Besides,  in  the  Upani$adic  texts  that 
speak  of  the  path  as  starting  from  flame,  the  stages  in  the  path 
are  quite  a  number,  whereas  they  are  few  in  other  texts;  and  it 
is  proper  that  the  fewer  should  be  made  to  fit  in  with  the  greater. 
It  is  from  such  considerations  that  it  has  been  said,  “The  soul 
travels  along  the  path  starting  from  flame,  for  this  is  well 
known.” 

Topic  2:  The  Departing  Soul  Reaches  Air  after  Year 

IRII 

(The  soul  of  the  knower  of  the  qualified  Brahman  reaches) 
3TFJH  3I5^  from  the  year’  owing  to  the 

absence  and  presence  of  specification. 

2.  The  soul  of  the  knower  of  the  qualified  Brahman  goes  from 
the  year  to  air ,  on  account  of  the  absence  and  presence  of  speci¬ 
fication. 

1To  imply  that  a  man  dying  even  at  night  proceeds  along  the  rays. 
Thus  it  denies  only  the  possible  non-attainment  of  the  rays.  It  cannot 
also  deny  the  progress  through  flame  etc. 


IV.  iii.  2]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  873 

In  what  definite  order,  again,  should  the  different  presenta¬ 
tions  of  the  progress  of  the  soul  (along  the  path  of  the  gods)  be 
linked  up  in  a  chain  of  attributes  and  substantives?  That  link 
is  supplied  by  the  teacher  acting  as  a  friend.  The  Kausltakins  read 
of  their  path  of  the  gods  thus:  “Attaining  this  path  of  the  gods, 
he  comes  to  the  world  of  Fire;  he  comes  to  the  world  of  Air, 
(he  comes  to  the  world  of  Varuna);  he  comes  to  the  world  of 
Indra;  he  comes  to  the  world  of  Prajapati  (Virat);  he  comes 
to  the  world  of  Brahma  (Hiraoyagarbha)”  (Kau.  I.  3).  There 
the  term  “world  of  Fire”  is  synonymous  with  flame  (of  Bj\ 
VI.  ii.  15),  since  both  indicate  burning,  so  that  one  need  not 
take  any  pains  for  the  establishment  of  an  order  with  regard  to 
these.  But  since  (the  deity  of)  air  is  not  heard  of  in  the  path 
starting  from  (the  deity  of)  flame  (in  the  Chandogya),  where 
should  it  be  placed?  The  answer  is  being  given  by  saying  that 
in  the  text,  “They  reach  (the  deity  of)  flame,  from  flame  (the 
deity  of)  day,  from  day  (the  deity  of  the)  bright  fortnight, 
from  the  bright  fortnight  (the  deity  of)  the  six  months  during 
which  the  sun  moves  northward,  from  the  six  months  to  (the 
deity  of  the)  year,  from  the  year  to  (the  deity  of)  the  sun” 
(Ch.  V.  x.  1),  they  assign  the  position  of  air  after  the  year  and 
before  the  sun. 

Why  should  it  be  so? 

“Owing  to  the  absence  and  presence  of  specification”.  Thus 
it  is  that  the  air  that  is  not  very  definitely  located  in  the  text, 
“he  comes  to  the  world  of  Air”  (Kau.  I.  3),  is  seen  to  be  spoken 
of  definitely  in  another  Upani$ad,  “When  a  man  departs  from 
this  world,  he  reaches  air,  which  makes  an  opening  there  for 
him  like  the  hole  of  a  chariot  wheel.  He  goes  upward  through 
that  and  reaches  the  sun”  (Bj\  V.  x.  1).  Since  in  this  text  air  is 
specifically  placed  before  the  sun,  air  is  to  be  assigned  a  position 
between  the  year  and  the  sun. 

Opponent :  Why  again,  after  noticing  the  specific  mention  of 
air  after  fire  (in  Kau.  I.  3),  should  not  air  be  placed  after  flame? 

Vedantin :  We  claim  that  there  is  no  such  specification. 

Opponent :  Was  not  the  text  quoted,  “Attaining  this  path  of 
the  gods,  he  comes  to  the  world  of  Fire,  he  comes  to  the  world 
of  Air,  (he  comes  to  the  world  of  Varuija)”  (Kau.  I.  3)? 


874 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[IV.iii.2 


The  answer  is  that  here  the  statement  is  merely  in  the  form 
of  an  enumeration  of  the  things  one  after  the  other,  there  being 
nothing  indicative  of  any  serial  order.  The  objects  reached  are 
alone  enumerated  here  by  saying  chat  he  goes  to  such  and  such 
regions,  whereas  in  the  other  (Brhadaranyaka)  text  it  is  stated 
that  he  proceeds  up  through  an  opening  as  big  as  the  hole  of  a 
chariot  wheel  to  reach  the  sun,  so  that  a  sequence  is  well  under¬ 
stood.  Hence  the  statement,  “Owing  to  the  absence  and  presence 
of  specification”,  is  quite  reasonable.  The  Vajasaneyins,  how¬ 
ever,  have  this  reading,  “from  the  months  to  the  world  of  the 
gods;  from  the  world  of  the  gods  to  the  sun”  (Bjr.  VI.  ii.  15). 
According  to  that  text,  the  soul  should  reach  air  from  the  world 
of  the  gods,  so  that  the  sun  may  be  reached  next.  But  when  the 
aphorist  says  that  the  soul  reaches  air  from  the  year,  he  has  the 
Chandogya  text  in  view  (V.  x.  1).  As  between  the  Chandogya 
and  the  Brhadaranyaka  Upanisads,  one  omits  the  world  of  the 
gods,  and  the  other  the  year.  But  since  both  are  authoritative, 
both  these  have  to  be  added  to  both;  and  while  doing  so,  it  has 
to  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  year,  being  connected  with  the 
months,  has  to  be  placed  earlier  and  the  world  of  the  gods  later.2 

Topic  3:  The  Soul  Proceeds  from  Lightning  to  Varuna 

criwTsfsr  suspend  11311 

cf$s\:  Varuna  after  lightning  because  of 

(their)  connection  (with  water). 

3 .  Varuna  is  to  be  placed  after  lightning ,  because  of  their 
connection  with  water  (i.e.  cloud). 

In  the  text,  “He  goes  from  the  sun  to  the  moon,  from  the 
moon  to  lightning”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5),  Varuna  is  to  be  placed 
after  lightning  on  the  authority  of  the  text,  “He  comes  to  the 
world  of  Varupa”  (Kau.  I.  3);  for  lightning  and  Varuna  (Rain- 
god)  are  related  to  each  other.  When  long  streaks  of  lightning 

*So  the  order  is:  Months,  year,  abode  of  gods,  air,  sun. 


IV.  iii.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  875 

dance  within  the  bowels  of  the  clouds  with  sharp  thundering 
sounds,  then  comes  down  rain,  which  fact  is  also  noted  in  the 
Brahmana  text,  “Lightning  flashes  and  thunder  roars;  it  will 
surely  rain”  (Ch.  VII.  xi.  1).  It  is  well  known  from  the  Vedas 
and  Smttis  that  Varuna  is  the  god  of  waters.  After  Varuna  are 
to  be  placed  Indra  and  Prajapati,  because  the  Kau$Itaki  Upani$ad 
recites  that  way  and  no  other  position  can  be  found  for  them. 
Varuna  and  others  have  to  be  relegated  towards  the  end,  since 
they  are  fresh  entrants  and  have  not  been  assigned  any  position 
in  the  path  (in  Ch.  IV.  xv.  5  or  Bf.  VI.  ii.  15)  starting  with 
flame  and  ending  with  lightning. 

Topic  4:  Guiding  Deities 

Doubt :  With  regard  to  flame  etc.  the  doubt  arises  as  to 
whether  these  are  marks  on  the  path,  or  places  of  experience,  or 
the  conductors  of  the  souls  moving  forward. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  the  conclusion  to  be  arrived  at  is  that 
the  flame  etc.  are  merely  descriptive  marks  on  the  path,  for  by 
its  very  nature  the  instruction  is  concerned  with  such  land¬ 
marks.  As  it  occurs  in  common  experience  that  when  a  man 
wants  to  go  to  a  village  or  a  town,  he  is  instructed  thus:  “You 
should  go  to  such  a  hill,  then  to  a  banian  tree,  then  to  a  river, 
and  then  you  will  reach  the  village  or  town”,  so  also  it  is  said 
here,  “From  flame  to  the  day-time,  from  the  day-time  to  the 
bright  fortnight”,  and  so  on.  Or  it  may  well  be  that  these  are 
places  of  experience.  It  is  thus  that  fire  etc.  are  associated  with 
the  word  “world”,  as  for  instance  in,  “he  comes  to  the  world  of 
Fire”  (Kau.  I.  3).  In  common  parlance,  the  word  “world”  is  used 
with  regard  to  places  where  the  creatures  experience  (the 
results  of  virtues  and  vices),  as  for  instance,  “the  world  of  men, 
the  world  of  manes,  the  world  of  gods”  (Br.  I.  v.  16),  and  so 
on.  Even  so  is  the  Brahmaua  text,  “They  get  attached  to  the 
worlds  of  days  and  nights”3  (S.  B.  X.  ii.  6.8).  Hence  the  flame 
etc.  are  not  the  conducting  deities.  Besides,  these  cannot  reason¬ 
ably  conduct  the  souls  as  they  are  insentient;  for  in  common 

•The  men  of  rites  and  meditations  get  their  results  in  the  worlds 
figuratively  called  days,  nights,  etc. 


876 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA 


[IV.  iii.  4 


experience  it  is  the  intelligent  men,  employed  by  a  king,  that 
escort  others  who  have  to  be  guided  along  inaccessible  ro,ids. 
Vedantin :  To  this  we  say, 


(These  are)  guiding  deities 

of  the  indicative  mark  to  that  effect. 


because 


4.  ( Flame  etc .  are)  conducting  deities ,  owing  to  the  indicative 
mark  to  that  effect. 


These  must  reasonably  be  conducting  deities. 

Why? 

“Owing  to  indicatory  mark  to  that  effect”.  Thus  the  text, 
“From  the  moon  he  reaches  the  deity  of  lightning.  A  super¬ 
human  (lit.  “not  belonging  to  Manu’s  creation”)  comes,  and 
he  escorts  them  from  there  to  the  world  of  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV. 
xv.  5),  reveals  this  escorting  to  be  an  established  fact. 

Opponent :  That  sentence  cannot  go  beyond  what  it  actually 
states. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  since  the  attribute  (viz  superhuman)  is 
meant  simply  to  deny  the  assumption  that  this  being  is  human 
(lit.  belongs  to  Manu’s  creation)  which  might  arise  from  an 
already  established  fact.  The  adjective  “superhuman”  placed 
before  “being”  for  the  sake  of  ruling  out  human  guides  becomes 
justified  if  sentient  beings  are  already  known  as  guides  in  the 
flame  etc.  and  these  are  also  understood  to  be  within  Manu’s 
creation. 

Opponent :  A  mere  indicative  mark  cannot  decide  thus  in  the 
absence  of  any  logic  behind  it. 

Vedantin  :  That  defect  does  not  arise, 

:  IIV.II 

:  That  being  established  on  account  of 

both  (the  person  and  the  path)  being  unconscious. 

5 .  Because  that  stands  established  on  account  of  both  (the 
traveller  and  the  path)  being  then  unconscious. 


IV.iii.5]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  877 

Now  those  who  would  pass  along  the  path  through  flame  etc. 
have  their  senses  and  organs  bunched  up  owing  to  their  separa¬ 
tion  from  the  bodies,  and  so  they  are  devoid  of  independent 
action.  The  flame  etc.  also  are  not  independent,  they  being 
insentient.  So  it  can  be  understood  that  some  deities  who  are 
sentient  and  identify  themselves  with  (and  preside  over)  the 
flame  etc.  are  engaged  in  the  work  of  escorting.  In  common 
experience  too,  when  people  become  intoxicated  or  unconscious 
and  have  their  senses  befuddled,  they  are  led  through  their  paths 
by  others.  Besides,  the  flame  etc.  being  uncertain,  cannot  be 
the  indicative  marks  or  features  of  the  path;  for  one  dying  at 
night  cannot  reasonably  have  an  accession  of  daylight,  and  it 
was  stated  earlier  that  there  can  be  no  waiting  for  the  day.  But 
such  a  defect  does  not  arise  when  these  have  permanence  in 
their  identity  with  the  deities.  That  the  deities  are  mentioned 
by  the  words  flame  etc.  can  be  justified  on  the  ground  that 
they  identify  themselves  with  these.  And  such  statements  as, 
“from  flame  to  the  day-time”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5,  V.  x.  1,)  do  not 
create  any  difficulty  even  if  the  escorting  deities  are  meant,  the 
meaning  in  that  case  being,  “Through  the  instrumentality  of 
the  deity  of  flame  they  reach  the  deity  of  the  day-time,  through 
the  instrumentality  of  the  deity  of  the  day-time  they  reach  the 
deity  of  the  bright  fortnight”.  In  common  parlance  also  people 
impart  instruction  about  the  guides  on  the  way  thus:  “From 
here  you  go  to  Balavarman,  then  to  Jayasiihha,  thence  to 
Kj-^oagupta”.  Moreover,  the  statement  in  the  beginning  is, 
“They  reach  the  flame”,  which  merely  tells  us  of  coming  in 
contact,  but  not  of  any  special  form  of  it.  At  the  end,  however, 
comes  the  statement,  “he  escorts  them  to  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV. 
xv.  6),  where  a  special  form  of  contact  as  between  an  escort 
and  the  escorted  is  stated.  From  this  it  can  be  ascertained  that 
the  same  kind  of  contact  exists  in  the  beginning  as  well.  But 
owing  to  the  very  fact  that  all  the  senses  then  become  bunched 
up,  no  experience  is  possible  there.  As  for  the  word  “world” 
(lit.  place  of  experience),  that  can  well  be  used  even  with  regard 
to  the  beings  who  simply  pass  through  without  getting  any 
experience,  inasmuch  as  these  worlds  supply  (real)  experiences 
to  their  own  residents.  Hence  a  man  who  reaches  the  world 


878  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.iii .6 

presided  over  by  the  deity  of  fire  is  guided  along  by  the  god 
of  fire,  and  the  man  who  reaches  the  world  presided  over  by 
the  god  of  air  is  guided  forward  by  the  god  of  air.  This  is 
how  the  passage  is  to  be  construed. 

Opponent :  On  the  supposition  that  the  conducting  deities 
are  meant,  how  would  that  view  be  valid  in  the  cases  of  Vanina 
and  others?  For  Varuoa  and  others  are  placed  after  lightning, 
and  from  lightning  up  till  Brahman  is  reached,  a  super-human 
being  is  mentioned  in  the  Upani$ad  as  acting  as  the  escort. 

Vedantin :  Hence  the  aphorist  gives  the  answer: 

\\\\\ 

^ :  From  there  (i.e.  from  lightning)  (they  are  guided)  (from 
above)  ^  by  the  very  same  being  who  comes  to 

lightning  for  so  the  Upani$ad  says. 

6.  From  there  they  are  guided  by  the  very  same  being  who 
comes  to  lightning;  for  it  is  of  him  that  the  Upani$ad  speaks . 

It  is  to  be  understood  that  “from  there”,  after  arriving  at 
lightning,  they  go  to  the  world  of  Brahman,  being  led  through 
the  worlds  of  Varuna  and  others,  under  the  guidance  of  a 
superhuman  being  who  exists  (even)  beyond  lightning;  for  that 
very  being  is  mentioned  as  the  guide  in  the  Upani§adic  text, 
“A  superhuman  being  comes  and  escorts  them  from  there  to 
the  world  of  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5).  As  for  Varuija  and 
others,  it  is  to  be  understood  that  they  somehow  contribute  to 
the  task  of  that  superhuman  being  by  either  not  creating  any 
obstruction  or  helping  positively.  Accordingly,  it  is  well  said 
that  flame  etc.  stand  for  the  escorting  deities. 

Topic  5:  The  Path  Leads  to  the  Conditioned  Brahman 
STKfU'W  IIV3II 

Badari  (thinks  that  the  souls  are  led)  to  the 

conditioned  Brahman  because  of  the  possibility  of 

becoming  the  goal  on  Its  part. 


IV.  iii.8]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  879 

7.  Badari  thinks  that  the  souls  are  led  to  the  conditioned 
Brahman ,  for  it  (alone)  can  reasonably  be  the  goal . 

Doubt :  With  regard  to  the  text,  “He  escorts  them  to 
Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5),  the  point  to  be  considered  is  whether 
this  deity  escorts  them  to  the  inferior,  conditioned  Brahman  or 
to  the  superior,  unconditioned  Brahman  Itself. 

Why  should  such  a  doubt  arise? 

On  account  of  the  use  of  the  word  Brahman  and  the 
Upani§adic  mention  of  progress. 

Badari :  As  to  that,  the  teacher  Badari  thinks  that  they  are  led 
to  the  inferior,  conditioned,  and  qualified  Brahman  alone. 

Why? 

“For  It  can  logically  be  the  goal.”  For  this  conditioned 
Brahman  can  properly  be  a  goal  to  be  reached,  since  It  has  a 
locus.  But  with  regard  to  the  supreme  Brahman  there  can  be  no 
such  conceptions  as  an  approacher,  a  goal,  and  progress  towards 
It,  for  the  absolute  Brahman  is  omnipresent  and  is  also  the 
inmost  Self  of  the  travellers. 

firctfolrsffil  Il'MI 

8 .  And  (the  conditioned  Brahman  must  be  the  goal)  owing  to 
the  specific  mention  of  this . 

Since  in  another  Upani$adic  text  a  specific  statement  is  made 
thus,  “Then  a  being  created  from  the  mind  (of  Brahman,  i.e. 
Hiranyagarbha)  comes  and  conducts  them  to  the  worlds  of 
Brahman.  They  attain  perfection  and  live  in  these  worlds  of 
Brahman  for  a  great  many  superfine  years”  (Bj\  VI.  ii.  15), 
therefore  it  can  be  understood  that  the  path  is  related  to  the 
conditioned  Brahman  only.  For  it  is  improper  to  use  the  plural 
number  (in  “worlds”)  in  the  case  of  the  supreme  Brahman 
whereas  this  plural  number  quite  befits  the  conditioned  Brahman, 
since  there  can  be  such  a  thing  as  difference  of  states  in  It. 
Even  the  Upani$adic  use  of  the  word  “world”,  constituting  a 
place  of  experience  with  its  multiple  aspects,  fits  in  well  with  a 
conditioned  entity,  whereas  in  the  other  case  (of  the  absolute 
Brahman)  the  word  can  be  used  only  in  a  figurative  sense  as  in 


880  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.iii.  8 

such  texts,  “O  Emperor,  this  is  Brahmaloka  (the  world  that  is 
Brahman  Itself)”  (Br.  IV.  iv.  23).  Again,  to  speak  in  terms  of  a 
container  and  a  thing  contained  (as  in,  “In  those  worlds  of 
Brahman”)  hardly  fits  in  with  the  supreme  Brahman.  Hence  this 
escorting  relates  to  the  conditioned  Brahman  alone. 

Opponent :  The  word  Brahman  cannot  be  used  even  for  the 
conditioned  Brahman  inasmuch  as  it  was  established  earlier  in 
the  First  Chapter  that  Brahman  is  the  cause  of  the  origin  etc.  of 
the  whole  universe  (I.  i.  1). 

Vedantin :  As  to  that  the  answer  is: 

SWtalTj  H5.ll 

g  But  :  the  designation  as  such  frliftcqiq  (is)  owing 

to  nearness. 

9 .  But  (the  conditioned  Brahman  has)  that  designation  owing 
to  nearness  (to  the  absolute  Brahman). 

The  word  “but”  is  used  for  removing  the  objection.  Since 
the  inferior  Brahman  is  very  close  to  the  supreme  Brahman,  the 
use  of  the  word  Brahman  with  regard  to  the  former  creates  no 
difficulty.  The  established  practice  is  that  the  supreme  Brahman 
Itself  is  called  the  inferior  Brahman  when  It  is  conditioned  by 
the  pure  adjuncts  and  is  taught  as  though  possessed  of  the  attri¬ 
butes  of  being  identified  with  the  mind  and  such  other  features 
of  creation  for  the  saxe  of  meditation  by  some  aspirants  under 
certain  circumstances. 

Opponent :  On  the  supposition  that  the  aspirants  reach  the 
conditioned  Brahman,  their  non-return,  as  mentioned  in  the 
Upani$ad,  becomes  untenable;  for  unless  it  be  in  the  supreme 
Brahman  there  can  be  no  such  thing  as  eternal  existence.  As  a 
matter  of  fact,  the  Upani$ads  show  that  an  aspirant  who  goes 
along  the  path  of  the  gods,  does  not  return:  “Those  going  by 
this  path  never  return  to  this  human  cycle  of  birth  and  death” 
(Ch.  IV.  xv.  5),  “For  them  there  is  no  return  here”  (an  echo 
of  Bp.  VI.  ii.  15),  “Going  up  through  that  nerve  one  attains 
immortality”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  16,  Ch.  VIII.  vi.  6). 

Vedantin  :  To  this  we  say, 


IV.  iii.  1 1  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA?YA  881 

friqfori  gpT  ll*o|| 

q?TO-3Tczp)  On  the  final  dissolution  of  the  world  (of  Brahman), 
(they)  ^  together  with  ^-areq^Jr  the  lord  of  that  (world) 
(attain)  the  supreme  (Entity)  3R;  beyond  that 
on  the  strength  of  (Upani§adic)  declaration. 

10.  On  the  final  dissolution  of  the  world  of  the  conditioned 
Brahman ,  they  attain ,  along  with  the  lord  of  the  world ,  what  is 
higher  than  this  conditioned  Brahman ,  as  is  known  on  the 
strength  of  the  Upanisadic  decimation. 

The  idea  conveyed  is  that  when  the  time  for  the  final  dissolu¬ 
tion  of  the  world  of  the  inferior  Brahman  is  imminent,  the 
aspirants  who  have  acquired  full  realization  there  itself  attain 
thereafter,  along  with  Hiranyagarbha,  the  ruler  of  that  world, 
the  supreme  state  of  Visnu  which  is  absolutely  pure.  This  kind 
of  liberation  by  stages  has  to  be  admitted  on  the  strength  of 
the  Upani$adic  texts  speaking  of  non-return  etc.  For  we  estab¬ 
lished  earlier  that  it  is  incomprehensible  that  the  supreme 
Brahman  should  be  reached  by  any  process  of  moving  forward. 

wuw 

11.  This  is  confirmed  by  Smrti  as  well. 

The  Smrti  also  confirms  this  view:  “When  the  time  of  final 
dissolution  comes  at  the  close  of  the  life  of  Hiraoyagarbha,  all 
of  them,  with  enlightenment  already  attained,  enter  into  the 
supreme  state  along  with  Hiraoyagarbha”  ( Kurma-Burdna , 
Piirva-bhdga,  XII.  269).  Hence  the  conclusion  is  that  the 
Upani$adic  mention  about  the  progress  (along  a  path)  relates 
to  the  conditioned  Brahman. 

Doubt :  What  was  the  objection  in  the  background,  in  answer 
to  which  the  conclusion  is  presented  in  the  aphorisms  starting 
with,  “Badari  thinks  that  they  are  led  to  the  conditioned 
Brahman”  etc.  (IV.  iii.  7)? 

That  objection  is  now  being  shown  by  the  aphorisms  them¬ 
selves. 


56 


882  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.iii.  12 

qr  ii^ii 

Jaimini  (thinks  that  they  are  led)  to  the  supreme 
Brahman  that  being  the  primary  meaning. 

12.  Jaimini  thinks  that  they  are  led  to  the  supreme  Brahman , 
that  being  the  primary  meaning  (of  the  word  Brahman). 

But  the  teacher  Jaimini  thinks  that  in  the  text,  “He  escorts 
them  to  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  6),  what  is  meant  is  that  he 
leads  them  to  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself. 

Why  so? 

Since  “that  is  the  primary  sense”;  for  the  supreme  Brahman 
is  the  primary  meaning  of  the  word  “Brahman”,  the  inferior 
one  being  its  secondary  meaning.  And  as  between  the  primary 
and  secondary  meanings,  one  readily  understands  the  primary 
one  alone. 


ll^ll 

13.  And  (this  is  so)  because  the  Upani$ad  reveals  (this  fact). 

And  the  text,  “Going  up  through  that  nerve,  one  gets  immor¬ 
tality”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  16,  Ch.  VIII.  vi.  6),  shows  that  immortality 
is  preceded  by  moving  forward;  and  immortality  is  logically 
possible  in  the  supreme  Brahman,  but  not  so  in  the  conditioned 
Brahman,  that  being  subject  to  destruction.  For  the  Upani$adic 
text  runs  thus,  “Again,  that  in  which  one  perceives  a  second 
entity  is  limited,  it  is  mortal”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1).  This  move¬ 
ment  is  mentioned  in  the  Katha  Upani$ad  in  connection  with 
the  supreme  Brahman;  for  no  other  knowledge  is  presented  in 
that  context,  the  topic  of  the  supreme  Brahman  alone  having 
been  mooted  with  the  text,  “that  which  is  different  from  virtue, 
different  from  vice”  etc.  (Ka.  I.  ii.  14). 

q  ^  qnq  n?vu 

^  Moreover,  5rf%TFfT-3rf^T^rf^r:  the  firm  resolution  about  attain¬ 
ment  (is)  ?r  not  with  regard  to  the  conditioned  Brahman. 


IV.  iii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  883 

14.  Moreover ,  the  firm  resolution  about  attainment  is  not 
concerned  with  the  conditioned  Brahman. 

“Moreover,  the  firm  resolution  about  attainment”,  expressed 
in  the  text,  “May  I  attain  the  assembly  hall  in  the  palace  of 
Prajapati  (lit.  Hiraijyagarbha)”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1),  is  not 
directed  towards  the  conditioned  Brahman,  for  the  supreme 
Brahman,  as  distinguished  from  the  conditioned  Brahman,  forms 
the  topic  under  consideration,  as  is  clear  from  the  preceding 
text,  “He  who  is  known  as  Space  is  the  manifester  of  name  and 
form.  And  Brahman  is  that  in  which  are  included  these  two” 
(ibid).  This  is  also  evident  from  the  text,  “May  I  become  the 
fame  (or  glory)  of  the  Brahmaijas,  (the  fame  of  the  K§atriyas, 
the  fame  of  the  VaiSyas)”  (ibid),  which  presents  Brahman  as 
the  Self  of  everything;  for  from  the  text,  “That  which  is  called 
the  great  fame  has  no  parallel”  (§v.  IV.  19),  it  is  well  known 
that  the  supreme  Brahman  alone  is  called  “fame”.  This  arriving 
at  the  palace,  which  must  be  preceded  by  movement,  is 
described  in  connection  with  the  meditation  about  the  heart 
(Dahara-Vidya)  in  the  text,  “There  exists  the  palace  of  Brahman 
called  Aparajita  (unconquerable),  there  exists  the  golden  altar 
made  specially  by  the  Lord  Himself’  (Ch.  VIII.  v.  3).  And 
since  the  root  pad  (as  contained  in  pratipadye — may  I  arrive  at) 
conveys  the  sense  of  motion,  it  also  shows  the  necessity  of 
taking  the  help  of  some  path.  So  the  other  (opposite)  view  that 
can  be  held  is  that  the  Upani$adic  texts,  which  speak  of  the 
progress  along  a  path,  are  connected  with  the  supreme  Brahman. 

Vedantin :  These  two  views  have  been  presented  by  the 
teacher  (Vyasa)  in  these  (two  sets  of)  aphorisms.  Of  these  the 
one  view  is  contained  in  the  aphorisms  starting  with  “Badari 
thinks . . . ;  for  It  alone  can  reasonably  be  the  goal”  (IV.  iii. 
7-11);  and  the  other  view  is  presented  in  the  aphorisms  begin¬ 
ning  with  “Jaimini  thinks . . . ,  that  being  the  primary  meaning 
of  the  word  Brahman”  (IV.  iii.  12-14).  Of  these  two  groups  of 
aphorisms,  the  group  commencing  from  “ . . .  for  It  alone  can 
reasonably  be  the  goal”  can  prove  the  falsity  of  the  other  group 
commencing  with  “that  being  the  primary  meaning”,  and  not 
vice  versa.  So  the  earlier  point  of  view  has  been  explained  as 


884  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iii.  14 

the  acceptable  position,  whereas  the  second  one  is  held  by  the 
opponents  (of  Vedanta).  There  can  be  none  to  command  that 
one  must  stick  to  the  primary  sense  alone  (of  the  word 
“Brahman”)  even  when  there  is  no  such  possibility.  Besides, 
with  a  view  to  eulogizing  the  superior  knowledge,  it  is  quite 
proper  even  in  a  context  of  the  superior  Brahman,  to  describe 
the  path  connected  with  the  other  kind  of  inferior  knowledge, 
just  as  it  is  done  in  the  text,  “The  other  (nerves)  that  have 
different  directions  become  the  causes  of  death”  (Ch.  VIII.  vi. 
6).  As  for  the  text,  “May  I  reach  the  hall  in  the  palace  of 
Prajapati”  (Ch.  VIII.  xiv.  1),  it  involves  no  contradiction  to 
treat  it  separately  from  the  earlier  sentence  so  as  to  mean  a 
resolution  for  attaining  the  conditioned  Brahman.  (From  the 
standpoint  of  eulogy  or  meditation)  it  is  quite  in  order  to  speak 
even  of  the  qualified  Brahman  as  being  the  Self  of  all,  as  is  done 
in,  “He  who  is  possessed  of  all  activities,  possessed  of  all  desires” 
(Ch.  III.  xiv.  2,  4).  Hence  the  Upani§adic  texts  about  movement 
are  connected  with  the  inferior  (qualified)  Brahman  alone. 

In  pursuance  of  the  usual  practice,  however,  some  would 
ascribe  the  earlier  aphorisms  to  the  opponent,  and  the  latter 
ones  to  themselves.  In  accordance  with  such  an  arrangement, 
they  would  prove  that  the  texts  connected  with  movement  are 
concerned  with  the  supreme  Brahman  Itself.  But  that  is 
improper  since  Brahman  cannot  logically  be  a  goal  to  be 
attained.  The  supreme  Brahman  can  never  become  a  goal  to  be 
achieved  which  pervades  everything,  which  is  inside  everything, 
which  is  the  Self  of  all,  and  whose  characteristics  have  been 
thus  indicated  by  the  Upanisads:  “All-pervasive  like  space  and 
eternal”,  “That  which  is  Brahman,  immediate  and  direct,  that  is 
the  Self  within  all”  (Br.  III.  iv.  1),  “The  Self  Itself  is  all  this” 
(Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2),  “This  world  is  nothing  but  Brahman  the 
highest”  (Mu.  II.  ii.  11).  For  one  cannot  reach  where  one 
already  is.  The  well-known  fact  in  the  world  is  that  one  thing 
is  reached  by  something  else. 

Opponent :  In  ordinary  life,  a  place  already  reached  can  still 
be  reached  again  in  terms  of  change  of  environment,  as  for 
instance,  a  man  already  on  this  earth  may  still  reach  it  in  terms 
of  altered  position.  Similarly  a  boy  who  continues  to  be  the 


IV.  iii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  885 

same  person  may  be  noticed  in  terms  of  change  in  the  period 
of  life  to  be  progressing  towards  old  age  occurring  to  himself. 
So  also  Brahman  may  somehow  become  a  goal  to  be  approached 
by  virtue  of  Its  being  equipped  with  all  kinds  of  power. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  all  distinctions  are  ruled  out  from 
Brahman  in  accordance  with  such  Upanisadic  and  Smjti  texts 
and  logic  as,  “Without  parts,  without  action,  calm,  free  of 
blemishes,  free  of  taints”  (Sv.  VI.  19),  “It  is  neither  gross  nor 
minute,  neither  short  nor  long”  (Bf.'III.  viii.  8),  “Since  He  is 
coextensive  with  all  that  is  internal  and  external,  and  since  He 
is  birthless”  (Mu.  II.  i.  2),  “That  great  birthless  Self  is  undecay¬ 
ing,  immortal,  undying,  fearless,  and  Brahman  (i.e.  infinite)” 
(Bjr.  IV.  iv.  25),  “This  is  the  Self,  which  has  been  described  as 
‘Not  this’,  ‘Not  this’  ”  (Br.  III.  ix.  26),  according  to  which  it 
cannot  be  imagined  that  the  supreme  Self  can  have  any  con¬ 
nection  with  any  distinct  time,  space,  etc.,  so  as  to  be  reached 
on  the  analogy  of  a  particular  place  on  the  earth  or  a  stage  of 
life.  The  earth  or  age  can  well  become  the  goal  to  be  reached 
in  terms  of  particular  place  or  time,  since  they  can  have  distinct 
localities  and  periods. 

Opponent :  Brahman  can  have  different  powers  since  the 
Upani$ads  show  It  to  be  the  cause  of  the  origin,  continuance, 
and  dissolution  of  the  universe. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  since  the  Upani$adic  texts  denying  distinc¬ 
tive  attributes  cannot  be  interpreted  in  any  other  way. 

Opponent :  In  the  same  way  the  texts  about  origin  etc.  cannot 
be  interpreted  otherwise. 

Vedantin :  Not  so,  for  their  purpose  is  to  establish  unity.  The 
scripture  that  propounds  the  reality  of  Brahman,  existing  alone 
without  a  second,  and  that  proves  the  unreality  of  all  modifica¬ 
tions  with  the  help  of  the  illustrations  like  clay,  cannot  be  meant 
for  establishing  the  truth  of  origin  etc. 

Opponent:  Why  again  should  the  texts  about  origin  etc.  be 
subservient  to  the  texts  denying  distinction  and  not  the  other 
way  round? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is  that  this  is  so  because  the  texts 
denying  distinction  lead  to  a  knowledge  which  is  complete  by 
itself  (and  leaves  behind  no  more  curiosity  to  be  satisfied).  For 


886  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  IV.  iii.  14 

when  one  has  realized  that  the  Self  is  one,  eternal,  pure,  and  so 
on,  one  cannot  have  any  more  curiosity  to  be  satisfied  as  a  result 
of  the  rise  in  him  of  the  conviction  that  the  highest  human 
goal  has  been  reached,  as  is  known  from  such  Upani$adic 
passages  as,  “then  what  sorrow  and  what  delusion  can  there  be 
for  that  seer  of  oneness?”  (Is  ,  7),  “You  have  attained  that 
which  is  free  from  fear,  O  Janaka”  (Bf.  IV.  ii.  4),  “The 
enlightened  man  is  not  afraid  of  anything.  Him  indeed  this 
remorse  does  not  afflict,  ‘Why  did  I  not  perform  good  deeds, 
and  why  did  I  perform  bad  deeds?’”  (Tai.  II.  ix.  1).  This  is 
confirmed  equally  by  noticing  the  contentment  of  the  enlight¬ 
ened  ones,  and  from  the  condemnation  of  the  pursuit  of  unreal 
modifications  in,  “He  who  sees  as  though  there  is  difference 
here  goes  from  death  to  death”  (Ka.  II.  i.  10).  Accordingly,  the 
texts  denying  distinctions  cannot  be  understood  to  be  subservient 
to  others.  But  the  texts  about  origin  etc.  cannot  give  rise  to  any 
such  self-contained  knowledge  (that  allays  further  curiosity). 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  they  are  seen  to  aim  at  something  else.  Thus 
it  is  that  (in  the  Chandogya  Upani§ad)  the  start  is  made  with, 
“O  amiable  one,  know  this  sprout  (that  this  body  is)  to  have 
come  out  of  something;  for  it  cannot  be  without  a  root”  (VI. 
viii.  3);  and  then  the  Upani$ad  says  later  (in  “with  the  help 
of  that  sprout  try  to  find  out  the  root  that  is  Existence”  VI. 
viii.  6)  that  Existence  alone  which  is  the  source  of  the  universe 
has  to  be  known.  Similar  also  is  the  text,  “Crave  to  know  that 
from  which  indeed  all  these  creatures  originate,  by  which  they 
are  sustained  after  birth,  towards  which  they  advance,  and  into 
which  they  merge.  That  is  Brahman”  (Tai.  III.  i.  1),  (where  also 
the  reality  to  be  known  is  Brahman  alone).  Thus  since  the 
texts  about  creation  etc.  are  meant  for  imparting  the  knowledge 
of  oneness.  Brahman  cannot  be  possessed  of  many  powers  and 
hence  also  It  cannot  reasonably  be  a  goal  to  be  reached.  Any 
travelling  towards  Brahman  is  denied  in  the  text,  “His  organs 
do  not  depart.  Being  but  Brahman,  he  is  merged  in  Brahman” 
(Bf.  IV.  iv.  6).  This  fact  was  explained  under  the  aphorism, 
“For  in  the  case  of  the  followers  of  one  recension  there  is  a 
clear  denial  of  the  soul’s  departure”  (IV.  ii.  13). 

On  the  supposition,  again,  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  travel- 


IV.  iii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  887 

ling,  the  travelling  soul  must  be  a  part  or  a  transformation  of 
Brahman,  or  something  different  from  it;  for  travelling  is  impos¬ 
sible  in  a  case  of  total  unity. 

Opponent :  Even  if  it  be  so,  what  does  it  amount  to? 

Vedantin :  The  answer  is  that  if  it  be  a  part,  then  since  the 
whole  (Brahman)  is  a  goal  ever  attained  by  that  part,  there 
can  be  no  such  thing  as  going  to  Brahman.  Moreover,  since 
Brahman  is  well  known  to  be  partless,  it  is  improper  to  imagine 
such  things  in  Brahman  as  a  part  and  a  whole.  The  position  is  the 
same  even  in  case  the  soul  be  a  transformation;  for  the  transform¬ 
ed  thing  is  ever  present  in  the  material  of  which  it  is  a  transfor¬ 
mation.  An  earthen  pot  can  never  exist  unless  it  be  in  identity 
with  the  earth,  for  it  will  cease  to  exist  when  it  is  not  so  identi¬ 
fied.  Again,  even  if  the  soul  be  either  an  effect  or  a  part  (of 
Brahman),  then  since  Brahman,  the  possessor  of  such  transforma¬ 
tions  or  parts,  remains  unchanged,  there  can  be  no  possibility  of 
the  soul’s  entering  into  the  transmigratory  state  (for  the  parts  of 
an  inert  stone  cannot  move,  nor  can  a  frog  be  confined  within  it). 
If  the  soul  be  different  from  Brahman,  it  must  be  either  atomic 
or  all-pervasive,  or  of  an  intermediate  size.  If  it  be  all-pervasive, 
there  can  be  no  travelling.  If  it  be  of  a  medium  size  (indeter¬ 
minate  size  changing  with  the  body),  it  will  become  imperma¬ 
nent.  If  it  be  atomic,  any  feeling  of  sensation  all  over  the  body 
will  be  inexplicable.  Besides,  the  views  about  the  atomic  and 
medium  sizes  were  previously  refuted  (under  the  aphorism  II. 
iii.  29)  in  an  elaborate  way.  If  the  soul  be  different  from  the 
supreme  Brahman,  such  scriptural  declarations  as,  “That  thou 
art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7)  will  be  nullified.  This  defect  is  equally  in 
evidence  even  if  the  soul  be  either  a  transformation  or  a  part. 

Opponent :  Since  the  source  and  its  modifications  and  parts 
are  the  same  (constituting  a  single  whole),  no  defect  arises 
from  these  two  points  of  view. 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  because  (in  that  case)  unity  in  the  primary 
sense  becomes  impossible.  Besides,  from  all  these  points  of  view 
there  arises  the  predicament  of  liberation  being  entirely  ruled 
out,  owing  to  the  non-eradication  of  the  notion  of  the  identity 
of  the  soul  with  its  transmigratory  state.  Or  even  if  that  identity 
should  cease,  the  soul  will  lose  its  innate  nature  (by  merging  in 


888  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iii.  14 

Brahman),  since  its  identity  with  Brahman  is  denied  (by  the 
opponent). 

There  are  some  people  who  prattle  thus:  The  obligatory  and 
occasional  rites  are  performed  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  evil,  the 
optional  and  prohibited  rites  are  given  up  for  avoiding  heaven 
and  hell,  and  the  results  of  works  which  are  to  be  experienced 
in  the  present  body  get  exhausted  by  experiencing  them;  so 
that  when  the  present  body  falls,  at  the  same  time  that  there 
is  nothing  to  connect  the  soul  with  a  fresh  body,  a  man  who 
proceeds  in  this  way  will  achieve  liberation  consisting  in  the 
continuance  in  his  own  real  natural  state  even  without  having 
realized  the  unity  of  the  individual  Self  with  Brahman. 

This  is  not  correct  on  account  of  the  absence  of  any  valid 
evidence;  for  it  is  not  established  by  any  scripture  that  a  man 
wanting  liberation  should  act  thus.  This  is  a  position  bom  out 
of  one’s  own  intellectual  cognition  only  that  the  transmigratory 
state  is  a  creation  of  rites,  so  that  it  can  cease  to  exist  in  the 
absence  of  these  rites.  This,  again,  is  not  even  a  matter  for 
inferential  reasoning,  inasmuch  as  the  absence  of  the  causes  of 
the  transmigratory  state  is  beyond  (such)  determination.  There 
may  be  many  results  of  works  accumulated  in  past  lives  by 
each  creature,  which  have  good  or  bad  fruits  in  store  for  them. 
But  since  they  cannot  be  experienced  simultaneously  owing  to 
their  results  being  opposed  to  one  another,  some  of  them  which 
get  a  suitable  opportunity  produce  this  life,  while  others  wait 
for  the  adequate  space,  time,  and  cause.  And  since  these  remain¬ 
ing  ones  cannot  be  exhausted  by  the  experiences  in  the  present 
life,  it  cannot  be  asserted  that,  after  the  fall  of  the  present  body, 
a  man  will  get  freed  from  the  causes  calculated  to  produce  fresh 
bodies,  even  though  he  has  followed  the  course  of  life  described 
earlier  (by  the  opponent).  That  the  results  of  past  works  persist 
(even  after  death)  is  proved  on  the  authority  of  such  Upani$adic 
and  Smjti  texts  as,  “Those  who  perform  virtuous  deeds  here 
(obtain  excellent  births)”  (Ch.  V.  x.  7),  “With  the  residual 
results  of  these”. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  the  obligatory  and  occasional 
duties  will  eject  them  (i.e.  the  residual  results). 

Vedantin :  That  cannot  be,  because  there  is  no  opposition 


IV.  iii.  14]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  889 

between  them.  In  a  case  of  opposition  alone  can  something  be 
ejected  by  something  else.  But  the  accumulated  virtues  of  past 
lives  are  not  antagonistic  to  the  obligatory  and  occasional  duties, 
since  both  are  equally  meant  for  purification.  As  for  the  vices, 
they  may  be  ejected  when  they  stand  in  opposition,  for  they  are 
impure  by  nature;  but  that  does  not  prove  the  absence  of  the 
causes  of  rebirth,  since  the  virtues  can  well  constitute  such  a 
cause,  and  since  the  vices  even  are  not  known  to  be  totally 
eliminated.  Besides,  there  is  no  proof  to  show  that  the  per¬ 
formance  of  the  obligatory  and  occasional  duties  produce  no 
other  result  apart  from  hindering  the  emergence  of  evil;  for  it  is 
quite  possible  that  a  concomitant  by-product  will  come  into 
being,  as  Apastamba  mentions  in  his  Smjti,  “Just  as  when  a 
mango  tree  is  planted  for  its  fruits,  its  shade  and  sweet  aroma 
are  produced  as  by-products,  so  also  when  virtuous  deeds  are 
done,  other  factors  come  out  as  by-products”.  Moreover,  until 
complete  enlightenment  comes,  nobody  can  make  a  promise  of 
remaining  totally  free  from  the  optional  and  prohibited  acts  in 
the  period  between,  birth  and  death,  for  subtle  lapses  are  noticed 
in  the  cases  of  the  most  careful  men.  Maybe  all  this  will  be 
considered  a  doubtful  contingency.  Even  so,  it  becomes  difficult 
to  be  convinced  that  no  cause  for  rebirth  remains.  Besides,  unless 
it  is  admitted  that  the  soul’s  identity  with  Brahman  is  a  truism 
realizable  through  knowledge,  it  is  idle  to  expect  liberation  for  a 
soul  which  is  (believed  to  be)  an  agent  and  an  experiencer  by 
nature;  for  one’s  nature  can  never  be  given  up  like  heat  by  fire. 

Opponent :  It  may  well  be  that  it  is  an  evil  for  the  soul  to  act 
as  an  agent  and  an  experiencer,  but  not  so  is  the  power  itself  for 
the  action  and  the  experience,  so  that  liberation  may  come  when 
the  expression  of  the  power  (in  the  form  of  action)  is  stopped 
while  the  latency  remains. 

Vedantin :  That  too  is  wrong,  for  so  long  as  the  potentiality 
remains,  the  manifestation  of  the  power  becomes  irresistible. 

Opponent :  In  that  case  it  may  well  be  that  the  power  by  itself 
cannot  accomplish  anything  without  the  aid  of  other  causes, 
so  that  even  when  that  power  abides  (potentially)  alone,  it 
cannot  run  into  evil. 

Vedantin :  That  also  is  wrong  since  the  other  causes  (like 


890  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iii.  14 

adrtfa — unseen  potentiality  of  past  action,  as  also  the  potential 
results)  ever  remain  associated  (with  the  soul)  through  their 
association  with  the  latency  (of  agentship  and  experience). 
Hence  there  can  be  no  hope  of  liberation  so  long  as  a  soul  per¬ 
sists  to  be  by  nature  an  agent  and  experiencer  when  at  the  same 
time  that  its  identity  with  Brahman,  realizable  through  know¬ 
ledge,  does  not  exist.  And  the  Upani$ad  denies  that  there  can  be 
any  other  path  of  liberation  except  knowledge,  “There  is  no 
other  path  to  reach  the  goal”  (Sv.  III.  8). 

Opponent :  Even  if  the  soul  be  non-different  from  the  supreme 
Brahman,  this  will  only  result  in  the  annulment  of  all  human 
dealings  (including  the  scriptural  instruction),  for  then  there 
can  be  no  application  of  the  means  of  knowledge  like  percep¬ 
tion  etc. 

Veddntin :  Not  so,  for  that  is  possible  before  enlightenment 
like  the  behaviour  in  a  dream  before  awakening.  The  scripture 
also  speaks  of  the  use  of  perception  etc.  in  the  case  of  the 
unenlightened  man  in  the  text,  “Because  when  there  is  duality, 
as  it  were,  then  one  sees  something”  (Bj\  II.  iv.  14,  IV.  v.  15); 
and  then  it  shows  the  absence  of  this  in  the  case  of  an  enlight¬ 
ened  man,  “But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman  everything  has 
become  the  Self,  then  what  should  one  see  and  through  what?” 
(ibid)  etc.  Thus  since  the  notion  of  Brahman  as  a  goal  to  be 
reached  and  such  other  ideas  are  eliminated  for  one  who  has 
realized  the  supreme  Brahman,  any  movement  cannot  be  asserted 
in  his  case  in  any  way. 

Opponent :  Where  then  can  the  texts  about  movement  find 
proper  scope? 

Veddntin :  The  answer  is  that  their  scope  is  limited  within  the 
meditations  based  on  attributes.  Thus  it  is  that  the  pursuit  of  a 
path  is  sometimes  spoken  of  in  connection  with  the  meditation 
on  the  five  fires,  and  sometimes  with  the  meditation  on  the 
couch  (of  Brahman)  or  on  Vaisvanara.  Even  where  a  move¬ 
ment  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  Brahman,  as  in  “Prana  (lit. 
vital  force)  is  Brahman,  Bliss  is  Brahman,  Space  is  Brahman” 
(Ch.  IV.  x.  4),  and  “Then  the  tiny  lotus  of  the  heart  that  exists 
as  a  place  in  this  city  that  this  body  is”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  1),  there 
also  a  movement  is  possible,  because  what  is  meditated  on  there 


IV.  iii.  14]  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BHASYA  891 

is  but  the  qualified  Brahman  Itself,  possessed  of  the  attributes 
of  being  “the  ordainer  of  the  results  of  works”,  “the  possessor 
of  all  true  desires”,  and  so  on.  But  nowhere  is  any  movement 
indicated  in  connection  with  the  supreme  Brahman  in  the  same 
way  as  it  is  denied  in,  “his  organs  do  not  depart”  (Bf.  IV.  iv. 
6).  Since  even  in  passages  like,  “The  knower  of  Brahman  attains 
the  Highest”  (Tai.  II.  i.  1),  where  the  root-meaning  of  “attain¬ 
ment”  implies  movement,  there  is  no  possibility  of  reaching 
anywhere  according  to  the  reasons  already  adduced,  therefore 
it  is  the  very  realization  of  one’s  own  nature  that  is  spoken  of 
as  this  attainment  from  the  standpoint  of  erasing  out  this  universe 
of  name  and  form  superimposed  through  ignorance.  And  it  is  to 
be  understood  as  having  been  said  in  the  same  sense  as,  “Having 
been  Brahman,  he  attains  Brahman”  (Bj\  IV.  iv.  6)  and  similar 
texts.  Again,  even  if  movement  has  to  be  explained  in  connection 
with  the  supreme  Brahman,  it  must  be  held  to  have  been  asserted 
either  by  way  of  inducing  the  aspirant  or  for  meditation.  Now, 
no  inducement  can  be  generated  by  speaking  of  movement  to 
one  who  has  realized  Brahman,  since  that  is  already  an  accom¬ 
plished  fact  for  him  by  his  having  become  established  in  his 
own  Self,  which  consummation  is  brought  about  by  the  know¬ 
ledge  of  Brahman,  and  which  is  directly  (and  not  mediately) 
self-evident  to  himself.  Moreover,  it  does  not  stand  to  reason 
that  the  realization  of  Brahman,  which  is  not  productive  of 
any  result,  but  merely  presents  liberation  as  an  ever  accom¬ 
plished  fact,  should  depend  in  any  way  on  the  reflection  about 
a  course  to  be  followed.  Accordingly,  movement  is  possible  only 
in  relation  to  the  inferior  Brahman.  That  being  so,  it  is  only 
through  a  failure  to  distinguish  between  the  superior  Brahman 
and  inferior  Brahman  that  the  texts  about  travelling  that  refer 
to  the  inferior  Brahman  are  ascribed  to  the  superior  Brahman. 

Opponent :  Are  there  then  two  Brahmans — one  superior  and 
the  other  inferior? 

Vedantin :  Quite  so;  for  we  come  across  such  texts  as,  “This 
very  Brahman,  O  Satyakama,  that  is  inferior  and  superior  is  but 
this  Ow”  (Pr.  V.  2). 

Opponent :  Which  again  is  the  superior  Brahman  and  which 
the  inferior? 


892  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iii.  14 

Vedantin :  The  superior  Brahman  is  spoken  of  where  It  is 
indicated  by  such  terms  as  “not  gross’*  through  a  negation  of 
all  the  distinctions  of  names,  forms,  etc.  called  up  by  nescience. 
That  very  Brahman  becomes  the  inferior  Brahman  where  It  is 
taught  as  possessed  of  some  distinct  name,  form,  etc.  for  the 
sake  of  meditation,  as  in  such  words  as,  “Identified  with  the 
mind,  having  . prana  (i.e.  the  subtle  body)  as  his  body,  and 
effulgence  as  his  form”  (Ch.  III.  xiv.  2). 

Opponent :  In  that  case  the  texts  about  non-duality  will  be 
compromised. 

Vedantin  :  Not  so,  for  that  objection  was  met  from  the  point 
of  view  of  the  limiting  adjuncts  created  by  name  and  form 
which  spring  up  from  nescience.  The  results  accruing  from 
that  meditation  on  the  qualified  Brahman,  mentioned  in  the 
relevant  contexts  and  consisting  in  the  divine  powers  over  the 
world  and  so  on  as  heard  of  in  such  texts  as,  “Should  he  be 
desirous  of  the  world  of  the  manes,  the  manes  come  to  him 
at  his  very  will”  (Ch.  VIII.  ii.  1),  however,  are  confined  within 
the  transmigratory  state  itself  on  account  of  the  continuance 
of  ignorance.  Since  this  result  is  associated  with  some  particular 
space,  any  travelling  for  Its  attainment  involves  no  contradic¬ 
tion.  Even  though  the  Self  is  omnipresent,  we  said  earlier  under 
the  aphorism,  “On  account  of  its  having  for  its  essence  the 
qualities  of  that  intellect”  (II.  iii.  29),  that  a  movement  comes 
to  be  perceived  when  the  limiting  adjuncts  like  the  intellect 
move,  just  as  much  as  space  appears  to  be  moving  when  vessels 
etc.  containing  it  move.  Hence  the  view  that  stands  well  estab¬ 
lished  is  “Badari  thinks  that  they  are  led  to  the  conditioned 
Brahman”  etc.  (B.  S.  IV.  iii.  7).  And  the  view  contained  in, 
“Jaimini  says  that  the  supreme  Brahman  is  attained”  etc.  (IV.  iii. 
12),  is  presented  merely  as  an  apparent,  alternative  view  by  way 
of  helping  the  (student’s)  development  of  the  power  of  intellect. 
This  is  how  it  is  to  be  understood. 

Topic  6:  Worship  with  and  without  Symbols 

Doubt :  This  is  well  established  that  any  travelling  is  con¬ 
cerned  with  the  conditioned  Brahman  and  not  with  the  supreme 
Brahman.  Now  the  doubt  is  this:  “Does  the  superhuman  being 


IV.  iii.  15  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  893 

(Ch.  IV.  xv.  6)  lead  to  the  world  of  Brahman  all  aspirants 
without  exception  who  meditate  on  the  conditioned  Brahman, 
or  does  he  lead  only  some  of  them?”  What  should  be  the  con¬ 
clusion  here? 

Opponent :  All  these  knowers  of  Brahman  must  reach  a  goal 
other  than  the  supreme  Brahman;  for  in  the  aphorism,  “The 
passage  of  the  soul  by  the  path  of  the  gods  is  not  restricted  to 
certain  meditations  only;  it  applies  to  all”  (III.  iii.  31),  this  path 
is  promised  equally  for  all  the  other  meditations. 

Vedantin :  To  this  comes  the  aphorist’s  rejoinder: 

|| WII 

(He)  leads  those  who  do  not  depend 

on  symbols  this  is  what  Badarayaqa  (says); 

there  being  no  contradiction  on  (admitting)  this 

twofold  division  ^  and  (because  of  the  logic  of)  of 

(becoming)  what  one  resolves. 

IS.  Badarayana  says  that  the  superhuman  being  leads  to 
Brahman  only  those  who  do  not  use  symbols  (in  their  medita¬ 
tion),  since  this  twofold  division  involves  no  contradiction  and 
one  becomes  what  one  resolves  to  be. 

-The  teacher  Badarayaija  thinks  that  leaving  out  those  who 
meditate  with  the  help  of  symbols,  the  superhuman  being  leads 
all  others,  who  meditate  on  the  conditioned  Brahman,  to  the 
world  of  Brahman  Itself.  For  it  involves  no  contradiction  to 
admit  this  twofold  division,  since  the  reasoning  about  non- 
restriction  (cited  above — B.  S.  III.  iii.  31)  is  applicable  to  all 
meditations  that  are  not  based  on  symbols.  A  confirming  reason 
for  this  twofold  division  is  found  in  “the  resolution  for  that”; 
for  it  is  but  reasonable  that  one  who  resolves  to  be  Brahman 
should  get  the  divine  glories  of  Brahman  as  it  is  stated  in  the 
text,  “one  becomes  just  as  one  meditates  on  Him”.  But  one 
cannot  have  the  belief  of  being  one  with  Brahman  when  medi¬ 
tating  with  the  help  of  symbols,  since  in  such  a  meditation  the 
symbol  predominates. 

Opponent :  The  Upani$ad  mentions  that  even  without  any 


894  BRAHMA -SCTRA-BH  ASYA  [IV.iii.15 

resolve  about  Brahman  one  can  reach  Brahman,  as  it  is  stated  in 
the  text,  “He  leads  them  to  Brahman”  (Ch.  IV.  xv.  5),  heard 
of  in  connection  with  the  meditation  on  the  five  fires  (and  not 
on  Brahman). 

Vedantin :  Let  this  be  so  where  a  direct  (specific)  declaration 
to  the  contrary  is  met  with.  But  the  aphorist  thinks  that  in 
accordance  with  the  logic  of  becoming  what  one  wills  to  be, 
the  general  rule  is  that  in  the  absence  of  any  specific  declara¬ 
tion,  those  meditators  who  entertain  a  resolution  about  Brahman, 
alone  reach  Brahman. 

tT  And  the  Upani$ad  reveals  a  speciality  (about 

results). 

16 .  And  the  Upanifad  reveals  a  speciality  about  the  results  (of 
meditations  with  symbols). 

Besides,  the  Upani$ad  shows  with  regard  to  the  meditations 
based  on  such  symbols  as  name  etc.,  that  the  succeeding  ones 
have  better  results  than  the  preceding  ones,  in  such  passages  as, 
“(One  who  meditates  upon  name  as  Brahman)  gets  freedom  of 
movement  as  far  as  name  extends”  (Ch.  VII.  i.  5),  “The  organ 
of  speech  is  surely  greater  than  name”  (Ch.  VII.  ii.  1),  “He 
gets  freedom  as  far  as  speech  extends”  (Ch.  VII.  ii.  2),  “Mind  is 
surely  greater  than  speech”  (Ch.  VII.  iii.  1),  and  so  on.  This 
distinction  about  results  is  possible  for  these  meditations  as  they 
are  dependent  on  symbols.  But  if  they  be  based  on  Brahman,  how 
can  there  be  any  gradation  in  the  results,  since  Brahman  is 
without  such  differences?  Accordingly,  the  meditations  based 
on  the  symbols  cannot  have  the  same  result  as  the  others  based 
on  Brahman. 


Section  IV 

Topic  1:  Nature  of  Freedom 


Doubt :  In  the  Upani$ad  occurs  the  text,  “Thus  indeed  does 
this  serene,  happy  being  become  manifest  (or  established)  in  its 
own  real  form  (i.e.  Self  or  nature)  after  having  risen  from  this 
body  and  having  reached  the  highest  Light”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3). 
With  regard  to  this  the  doubt  arises,  “Does  that  being  become 
manifest  with  some  adventitious  distinction  as  (it  happens)  in 
some  region  of  enjoyment  like  heaven,  or  is  it  established  as 
the  Self  alone?”  What  should  be  the  conclusion? 

Opponent:  That  manifestation  must  be  in  some  fresh  form 
even  as  in  other  regions,  for  liberation  too  is  well  known  to  be 
a  result,  and  the  term  “becomes  manifest”  is  synonymous  with 
“is  born”.  If  this  be  a  mere  establishment  in  its  own  form  (or 
nature),  then  since  one’s  own  nature  is  not  eliminated  even  in 
the  earlier  stages  (of  being  under  other  guises),  that  nature 
should  have  manifested  itself  even  there.  Hence  the  “being” 
becomes  manifest  as  something  distinctive. 

Veddntin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say, 

SFTOlfonfa:  lllll 

Having  reached  (the  highest  Light)  anfaqfa:  there  is 
manifestation  (of  the  soul)  because  of  the  use  (in 

the  Upani$ad)  of  the  term  (  )  “in  its  own  (Self)”. 

1 .  Having  reached  the  “ highest  Light”y  the  soul  becomes 
manifest  in  its  own  real  nature  because  of  the  use  of  the  term 
“in  its  own ”  (in  the  Upanifad). 

The  soul  manifests  itself  just  as  it  really  is,  but  not  as  possessed 
of  any  other  quality. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

Because  the  word  “own”  occurs  in  “becomes  established  in 
its  own  real  form”.  Otherwise  this  specification  with  the  word 
“own”  would  have  been  inappropriate. 


896  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iv.  1 

Opponent :  The  word  “own”  should  be  interpreted  to  mean 
“owned  by  (itself)”. 

Vedantin :  No,  for  that  is  not  under  reference  here.  Had 
that  been  meant  here,  then  in  whatever  form  that  being  would 
become  manifest  would  certainly  be  owned  by  it,  so  that  the 
use  of  the  word  “own”  would  be  useless.  But  if  the  meaning  “in 
its  Self”  be  accepted,  it  serves  a  purpose  inasmuch  as  it  implies 
that  the  soul  becomes  manifest  merely  in  its  own  form  and  not 
in  any  adventitious  form  as  well. 

Opponent :  What  difference  is  there  between  the  earlier  states 
and  this  (final)  one,  when  the  non-elimination  of  the  true  form 
is  the  same  in  either  case? 

Vedantin :  Hence  comes  the  reply: 

SrfcETFTT^  IRII 

(The  soul  is  then)  g^>:  free,  that  being  the  declara¬ 

tion. 

2. The  soul  then  attains  liberation ,  that  being  the  (Upani$adic) 
declaration . 

The  entity  that  is  spoken  of  here  as  becoming  manifest  in 
its  Self,  becomes  free  from  its  erstwhile  bondage  and  continues 
as  the  pure  Self,  whereas  in  the  earlier  state  it  “seemed  to  have 
become  blind”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  1),  “seemed  to  be  weeping”  (Ch. 
VIII.  x.  2),  “seemed  to  have  undergone  destruction”  (Ch.  VIII. 
xi.  1) — so  that  it  was  in  a  condition  of  being  tainted  by  the 
three  states  (of  waking,  dream,  and  sleep).  This  is  the  difference. 

Opponent :  How  again  is  it  known  that  the  soul  becomes 
free? 

Vedantin :  The  aphorist  answers  by  saying,  “that  being  the 
Upanisadic  declaration”.  Thus  it  is  that  in  the  text,  “I  shall 
explain  it  to  you  over  again”  (Ch.  VIII.  ix.  3),  the  promise  is 
made  of  explaining  the  Self,  free  from  the  defects  of  the  three 
states,  and  then  it  is  stated,  “The  being  that  is  really  without 
any  body  is  not  touched  by  likes  and  dislikes”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  1), 
and  the  conclusion  is  made  with,  “It  becomes  established  in  Its 
own  Self;  that  is  the  highest  Being”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3).  So  also 


IV.  iv.  4]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  897 

at  the  commencement  of  the  story,  the  text,  “The  Self  that  is 
beyond  sin”  etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  makes  a  declaration  about 
the  free  soul  alone.  Liberation  comes  to  be  considered  as  a  fruit 
merely  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  cessation  of  bondage,  and 
not  from  the  standpoint  of  production  of  any  fresh  result. 
Although  the  term  “becomes  manifest”  is  synonymous  with  “is 
born”,  still  that  is  said  by  way  of  contrast  to  the  earlier  state, 
just  as  we  would  say  that  a  man  becomes  established  in  health 
When  his  disease  leaves  him.  Hence  there  is  no  defect. 

3TTc*TT  ll^ll 

(The  “Light”  is)  3ttc*TT  the  Self,  because  of  the 

context. 

3.  The  Light  is  the  Self  as  it  is  obvious  from  the  context. 

Opponent :  How  can  the  soul  be  said  to  be  liberated,  since 
the  text,  “having  reached  the  supreme  Light”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3), 
describes  it  as  within  creation  itself?  For  by  usage  the  word 
light  denotes  physical  light.  One  who  has  not  turned  back  from 
created  things  cannot  become  free,  since  all  created  things  are 
well  known  as  sources  of  sorrow. 

Vedantin :  That  is  no  defect,  since  from  the  context  it  is 
obvious  that  the  Self  Itself  is  presented  here  by  the  word  “light”. 
As  the  topic  of  the  supreme  Self  is  made  the  starting  point  in 
the  sentence,  “The  Self  that  is  beyond  sin,  free  from  all  dirt,  and 
free  from  death’^  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  it  is  not  possible  to  jump  to 
the  physical  light  all  of  a  sudden;  for  that  will  be  tantamount 
to  discarding  the  subject-matter  under  discussion  and  intro¬ 
ducing  something  foreign  to  it.  The  word  “light”  is  seen  to  be 
used  for  the  Self  as  well,  as  in,  “Upon  that  immortal  Light  of 
all  lights,  the  gods  meditate”  (Bf.  IV.  iv.  16).  This  was  elabor¬ 
ated  under  the  aphorism,  “Light  is  Brahman”  (I.  iii.  40). 

Topic  2:  Liberated  Soul  Inseparable  from  Brahman 

arfsRlfa  IMI 


57 


898 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[IV.  iv.  4 


(In  liberation  the  soul  exists)  m  a  state  of  insepara¬ 
bleness  (from  the  Self)  for  so  it  is  noticed  (in  the 

Upani$ad). 

4.  In  liberation  the  soul  exists  in  a  state  of  inseparableness  from 
the  supreme  Self,  for  so  it  is  noticed  in  the  Upanifad. 

One  would  like  to  know  whether  the  entity  which  becomes 
established  in  its  own  Self  after  reaching  the  highest  Light 
remains  separate  from  the  supreme  Self  or  continues  in  a  state 
of  identification.  Now  when  in  such  an  inquisitive  mood  one 
might  conclude  that  the  being  exists  separately,  because  in  the 
text,  “He  moves  about  there”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3),  speaks  of  some¬ 
thing  holding  something  else  in  itself;  and  in  the  text,  “having 
reached  the  Light”,  a  subject  and  an  object  are  separately  men¬ 
tioned.  The  aphorist  explains  to  such  a  (doubting)  one  that  the 
liberated  soul  remains  identified  with  the  supreme  Self. 

Why  so? 

Because.it  is  so  noticed  in  the  Upani$ad.  Thus  it  is  that  texts 
like,  “That  thou  art”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  7),  “I  am  Brahman”  (Bj\  I. 
iv.  10),  “Where  one  does  not  see  anything  else”  (Ch.  VII. 
xxiv.  1),  “But  there  is  no  such  second  thing  separate  from  it 
which  it  can  see”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  23),  etc.,  reveal  the  supreme 
Self  as  non-separate  from  the  (individual)  soul.  And  in  con¬ 
formity  with  the  logic  of  becoming  what  one  resolves  to  be, 
the  result  (freedom)  should  accord  with  one’s  (Upani$adic) 
knowledge.  The  text,  “O  Gautama,  as  pure  water  poured  on 
pure  water  becomes  verily  the  same,  so  also  becomes  the  Self  of 
the  man  of  knowledge  who  is  given  to  deliberation  (on  the  su¬ 
preme  Self)”  (Ka.  II.  i.  15),  and  other  texts  which  set  forth  the 
nature  of  the  liberated  soul,  as  also  the  illustrations  like  the  river 
and  the  sea  (Mu.  III.  ii.  8),  reveal  only  this  fact  of  non-difference. 
As  regards  any  statement  implying  difference,  that  is  possible  in 
a  secondary  sense  even  in  a  context  of  non-difference,  as  is 
seen  in  such  texts  as,  “  ‘O  venerable  sir,  on  what  is  that  Infinity 
established?’  ‘On  Its  own  majesty’”  (Ch.  VII.  xxiv.  1), 
“Delighting  in  his  own  Self,  disporting  in  his  own  Self”  (Ch. 
VII.  xxv.  2). 


IV.  iv.  6]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA 

Topic  3:  Characteristics  of  the  Liberated  Soul 


899 


^^fWPTTHTf^T«T:  I IX.  1 1 

As  possessed  of  the  attributes  of  Brahman  srfqfc  (says) 
Jaimini  on  account  of  the  references  etc. 

S.  Jaimini  says  that  from  references  etc .  (in  the  Upani$ads) 
(it  is  evident  that  the  liberated  sold)  becomes  established  in  the 
attributes  that  Brahman  has. 

This  is  well  settled  now  that  in  the  text  “in  its  own  form” 
(Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3),  what  is  meant  is  that  it  becomes  established 
in  itself  as  the  Self,  and  not  in  any  extraneous  adventitious  form. 
But  now  when  the  desire  to  know  in  detail  arises,  it  is  being 
said  that  “in  its  own  form”  means  in  the  form  of  Brahman  that 
is  its  own  real  form  and  that  is  possessed  of  the  characteristics 
beginning  with  freedom  from  sin  etc.  and  ending  with  true 
desire  (Ch.  VIII.  vii.  1),  as  also  omnipresence  and  rulership  over 
all.  It  becomes  established  in  that  form  which  is  its  own.  This 
is  how  the  teacher  Jaimini  thinks. 

How  is  this  known? 

For  such  a  fact  is  known  from  the  references  in  the  Upani§ads 
and  other  reasons  (i.e.  fresh  information  etc.).  Thus  it  is  that 
through  the  very  reference  contained  in  the  text  beginning 
with,  “This  Self  that  is  beyond  sin”  etc.,  and  ending  with, 
“Having  true  desires  and  inevitable  will”  (ibid.),  the  Upani$ad 
makes  us  understand  that  the  individual  soul  is  the  same  as  the 
supreme  Self  possessing  these  attributes.  Similarly  through  the 
(fresh  information  in  the)  text,  “There  he  roams  about  eating, 
playing,  and  making  merry”  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3),  as  also,  “He  gets 
freedom  of  movement  in  all  the  worlds”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2),  it 
presents  its  form  of  divine  majesty.  From  this  view-point,  the 
statements  like,  “He  is  omniscient  and  ruler  of  all”  etc.  become 
quite  logical. 

cFTT^r  ft :  tl^tl 

fafaln  consciousness  as  that  much  (i.e.  conscious- 


900  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iv.  6 

ness)  only,  that  being  its  real  nature  5%  this  (is 

(what)  sftesftfa:  Autjulomi  (says). 

6.  Audulomi  says  that  the  liberated  soul  becomes  established 
in  consciousness  as  consciousness  itself ,  that  being  its  true  nature . 

Although  the  attributes,  such  as  freedom  from  sin  etc.,  are 
enumerated  as  though  they  are  different  from  one  another,  still 
they  are  based  on  false  concepts  arising  from  dependence  on 
mere  words;  for  all  that  can  be  understood  there  is  a  mere 
negation  of  sin  etc.  The  real  nature  of  the  soul,  however,  is 
consciousness  alone,  so  that  it  is  proper  that  the  liberated  soul 
should  be  established  in  that  nature  only.  And  thus  only  the 
Upani$adic  texts  like,  “Even  so,  my  dear,  is  the  Self  without 
interior  and  exterior,  entire  and  pure  intelligence  alone”  (By.  IV. 
v.  13),  become  duly  honoured.  Even  though  “having  true  desires 
— satyakdma,J  etc.  are  spoken  of  as  if  they  are  real  attributes 
belonging  intrinsically  to  some  entity  in  the  derivative  sense  of 
“he  that  is  possessed  of  true  desire”,  still  such  attributes  are 
dependent  on  association  with  limiting  adjuncts,  so  that  they 
cannot  constitute  the  true  nature  of  the  entity  like  consciousness; 
for  the  Self  is  denied  to  have  many  forms  inasmuch  as  a  diversity 
of  forms  is  denied  about  Brahman  in  the  aphorism,  “Even  from 
difference  of  place  a  twofold  characteristic  cannot  be  predicated 
of  Brahman”  (III.  ii.  11).  Hence  even  the  declaration  about 
eating  etc.  (Ch.  VIII.  xii.  3)  is  made  merely  for  praise,  meaning 
thereby  only  an  absence  of  sorrow;  and  this  is  just  like  the 
phrases,  “delighting  in  his  own  Self”  (Ch.  VII.  xxv.  2)  etc.  For 
any  delight,  play,  or  merry-making  can  never  be  described  as 
happening  in  the  Self  in  the  primary  sense,  since  all  these  pre¬ 
suppose  the  presence  of  a  second  entity.  Hence  the  teacher 
Audulomi  thinks  that  the  freed  soul  manifests  itself  as  the  Self 
in  which  there  is  no  trace  of  phenomenal  existence,  which  is 
consciousness  itself,  which  is  serene  and  happy,  and  which 
defies  all  verbal  description. 

IMI 

arfr  Even  so  arfarfa  there  is  no  contradiction 
owing  to  the  persistence  of  the  earlier  nature  in 


IV.  iv.  8  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  901 

accordance  with  the  Upani$adic  reference  yurCRn?:  (says) 
Badarayaga. 

7.  Badaraycma  says  that  even  so,  there  is  no  contradiction 
since  the  earlier  nature  exists  according  to  Upanifadic  reference. 

“Even  so”,  even  though  it  be  admitted  that  the  soul  manifests 
itself  in  its  own  real  nature  of  pure  consciousness,  still  (its 
possession  of)  the  earlier  form,  the  divine  majesty  of  (the 
qualified)  Brahman  that  is  known  from  such  reasons  as  Upa- 
ni$adic  reference  is  not  denied  from  the  empirical  point  of  view; 
and  hence  there  is  no  contradiction.  This  is  what  the  teacher 
Badarayaga  thinks. 

Topic  4:  Fulfilment  of  Desire  through  Will 

Doubt :  In  connection  with  the  meditation  based  on  the  heart 
it  is  heard  from  the  Upanisad,  “Should  he  desire  the  world  of 
the  manes,  the  manes  become  associated  with  him  at  his  mere 
wish”  (Ch.  VIII.  ii.  1)  etc.  The  doubt  here  is  whether  the  mere 
wish  is  the  cause  of  the  appearance  of  the  manes  or  it  is  the 
cause  in  association  with  some  other  factors. 

Opponent :  As  to  that,  although  the  Upani$ad  declares,  “at 
his  mere  wish”  still  it  is  proper  that  in  consonance  with  the 
affairs  of  the  world,  there  should  be  dependence  on  some  other 
factors.  Just  as  in  the  world  we  become  associated  with  our 
fathers  and  others  as  a  result  of  our  desire  coupled  with  some 
other  causes  like  approaching,  so  also  it  must  be  the  same  in  the 
case  of  the  liberated  soul.  It  is  only  thus  that  nothing  contrary 
to  common  experience  has  to  be  imagined.  When  it  is  said,  “at 
his  mere  wish”,  it  is  done  so  from  the  point  of  view  of  the 
easy  availability  of  the  other  means  that  lead  to  the  fulfilment 
of  the  desire  as  it  is  seen  in  the  case  of  a  king.  Moreover,  the 
manes  and  others  who  follow  the  dictates  of  one’s  desires  will 
be  as  unsteady  as  the  other  things  fancied  by  the  mind,  so  that 
they  will  not  be  able  to  provide  sufficient  enjoyment. 

Vedantin :  This  being  the  position,  we  say, 

VR\ 


902  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.iv.8 

g  But  from  volition  alone  because  such 

is  the  Upani$adic  text. 

8.  (The  fathers  and  others  come )  as  a  result  of  the  will  alone , 
because  the  Upanifad  says  so. 

The  contact  with  the  fathers  and  others  comes  about  owing 
to  the  will  alone. 

Why  so? 

“Because  the  Upani$ad  says  so.”  For  such  Upani$adic  texts  as, 
“the  manes  become  associated  with  him  at  his  mere  wish”  (Ch. 
VIII.  ii.  1)  will  be  compromised  if  other  causes  have  to  be  relied 
on.  As  for  the  other  factors,  they  may  well  be  there  if  they 
come  in  obedience  to  his  will;  but  no  other  means  that  requires 
an  additional  effort,  can  be  admitted,  since  in  that  case 
the  volition  will  remain  infructuous  till  that  other  factor  comes 
into  play.  Moreover,  in  a  matter  to  be  known  from  the  Upa- 
ni$ad,  any  general  argument  based  on  empirical  experience  has 
no  application.  Besides,  the  will  of  a  liberated  soul  is  different 
from  any  ordinary  will,  so  that  through  the  force  of  their  mere 
volition  these  (manes  and  others)  can  remain  steady  for  as  long 
as  the  occasion  demands.  Hence  this  occurs  through  volition 
alone. 


3m  tr*T  Iie.ll 

^  And  3RT:tra[  for  this  very  reason  3rq7q*-3rf^Tfa:  without 
any  other  lord  (to  rule  over). 

9.  And  for  that  very  reason  (a  man  of  knowledge  has)  no 
other  lord  (to  rule  over  him). 

“For  that  very  reason”,  just  because  his  will  cannot  be 
infructuous,  the  man  of  knowledge  is  without  any  ruler,  that 
is  to  say,  none  else  can  rule  over  him.  For  even  an  ordinary 
man  who  desires  something  does  not  wish  that  he  should  be 
dominated  over  by  somebody  else  so  long  as  he  can  avoid  that. 
The  Upani$adic  text  also  reveals  this  fact  in,  “Again,  those  who 
leave  this  world  after  realizing  the  Self  and  these  true  desires 
get  freedom  of  movement  in  all  the  worlds”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  6). 


IV.  iv.  11  ]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  903 

Topic  5:  Body  after  Reaching  Brahma-loka 

spra  sTrefoi?  n?oii 

Badari  (asserts)  3PTRJJ  the  absence  (of  body  and 
organs)  because  (the  Upanisad)  has  said  iTcpj  thus. 

10.  Badari  asserts  the  absence  of  body  and  organs  (for  one 
who  reaches  the  Brahma-loka — the  world  of  Brahman ),  for  the 
Upanisad  says  so. 

From  the  text,  “The  manes  become  associated  with  him  at 
his  mere  wish”  (Ch.  VIII.  ii.  1)  it  becomes  established  that  the 
mind  at  least  exists  as  the  instrument  of  desire  (even  after 
realizing  the  qualified  Brahman).  Now  it  is  being  examined 
whether  the  body  and  the  sense-organs  also  exist  or  do  not 
exist  for  the  man  who  attains  divine  powers.  As  to  that,  the 
teacher  Badari  thinks  that  the  body  and  senses  do  not  exist  for 
the  man  of  knowledge  who  becomes  thus  exalted. 

How  can  this  be  so? 

Because  the  scriptural  passage  runs  thus:  “He  becomes 
delighted  by  seeing  mentally  (through  these  divine  mental  eyes) 
these  desirable  things  that  exist  in  the  world  of  Brahman”  (Ch. 
VIII.  xii.  5).  Were  it  the  case  that  he  roamed  about  with  his 
mind,  as  well  as  body  and  sense-organs,  then  the  specific  men¬ 
tion  of  “mentally”  would  not  have  occurred.  Hence  there  is 
absence  of  body  and  sense-organs  after  liberation. 

>n#  nun 

Jaimini  (asserts)  the  existence  (of  body  and 

sense-organs)  since  the  Upanisad  speaks  of 

option. 

11.  Jaimini  asserts  the  existence  of  body  and  sense-organs 
(after  the  realization  of  the  qualified  Brahman),  since  the  Upa¬ 
nisad  speaks  of  option. 

The  teacher  Jaimini  thinks  that  like  the  mind,  the  body  and 
sense-organs  also  exist  for  the  liberated  man,  since  in  the  text, 
“He  remains  one,  he  becomes  threefold,  fivefold”  etc.  (Ch.  VII. 


904  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [  IV.  iv.  1 1 

xxvi.  2)  the  Upani$ad  mentions  that  he  has  the  option  of  chang¬ 
ing  his  state  variously.  And  diversification  without  a  difference 
of  bodies  is  not  easy  to  accomplish.  Although  this  diversification 
is  read  of  in  the  Upani$ad  as  a  matter  of  option  in  the  context 
of  the  knowledge  of  the  absolute,  Infinite  (Brahman),  still  it  is 
presented  there  (in  that  context)  for  the  sake  of  eulogizing  the 
knowledge  of  the  Infinite,  just  because  this  divine  power  does 
accrue  as  a  matter  of  fact  in  the  context  of  the  knowledge  of 
the  qualified  Brahman;  and  hence  this  result  does  actually 
emerge  in  connection  with  the  meditation  on  the  qualified 
Brahman. 

3RT :  Hence  Badarayafla  (considers  the  released  soul 

as)  of  both  characteristics  the 

Dvadasaha  sacrifice. 

12.  Hence  Bddardyaya  considers  the  released  souls  to  be  of 
both  kinds  (i.e.  with  or  without  bodies  and  senses)  just  as  it  is 
the  case  with  the  Dvddasaha  (twelve-day)  sacrifice. 

Vedantin :  “Hence”,  because  both  these  indicatory  marks  are 
noticed  in  the  Upani$ad,  therefore  the  teacher  Badarayaija  thinks 
that  it  is  valid  both  ways.  When  a  liberated  soul  wishes  to  have 
a  body,  he  gets  one;  and  when  he  desires  to  remain  without  it, 
he  has  none;  for  his  will  is  true  and  desires  are  diverse.  This  is  like 
the  sacrifice  performed  for  twelve  days  ( Dvadasaha ).  Just  as  a 
Dvadaidha  can  be  both  a  satra  and  an  ahina \  because  the  Vedas 
present  indicatory  marks  of  both,  so  also  is  the  case  here. 

II^II 

a^-3Pin%  In  the  absence  of  a  body,  (the  fulfilment  of  desires) 
:  becomes  reasonable  as  it  is  in  dream. 

1The  same  rite  Dvadasaha  is  sometimes  spoken  of  (with  the  verbs 
upayanti ,  dsirarn)  as  resorted  to  by  many  sacrificers,  in  which  case  it 
becomes  a  satra ;  again  it  is  enjoined  (with  yajayet )  that  a  man  desiring 
progeny  should  be  made  to  perform  the  Dvadasaha  sacrifice,  in  which 
case  it  becomes  an  ahina ,  because  of  the  injunction  about  the  sacrifice 
itself  and  the  specification  of  the  sacrificer. 


IV.  iv.  15  ]  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  905 

13.  In  the  absence  of  a  body ,  the  fulfilment  of  desires  is 
reasonably  possible  as  in  dreams . 

In  the  view  that  the  body,  together  with  the  sense-organs, 
ceases  to  exist  in  liberation,  the  liberated  souls  can  have  their 
desires  for  manes  and  others  fulfilled  (through  their  minds 
alone)  by  merely  feeling  their  presence  just  as  one  would  have 
them  in  a  dream.  For  it  can  be  justified  in  this  way: 

%  When  there  is  existence  (of  the  body  etc.),  (the  fulfil¬ 
ment  occurs)  qmgq  as  in  the  waking  state. 

14.  When  the  body  exists y  the  fulfilment  of  the  desires  is  just 
as  in  the  waking  state. 

In  the  view,  however,  that  the  body  exists,  the  liberated  soul 
can  reasonably  have  desires  for  father  and  others  fulfilled  by 
their  actual  presence  just  as  much  as  in  the  waking  state. 

Topic  6:  Entry  into  Many  Bodies 

Doubt :  In  the  aphorism,  “Jaimini  asserts  the  existence  of 
body  and  sense-organs,  since  the  Upani$ad  speaks  of  option” 
(IV.  iv.  11),  it  has  been  stated  that  the  liberated  soul  is  possessed 
of  a  body.  Now  when  on  becoming  threefold  and  so  on  (Ch. 
VII.  xxvi.  2),  many  bodies  are  created,  one  would  like  to  know 
whether  these  bodies  are  created  lifeless  like  wooden  puppets, 
or  they  are  endowed  with  animation. 

Opponent :  When  this  is  asked,  one  may  conclude  that  since 
the  mind  and  the  soul  cannot  be  separated,2  and  hence  they 
remain  (encaged  in  and)  associated  with  a  single  body,  the 
other  bodies  must  be  lifeless. 

Vedantin :  Such  being  the  assertion,  the  aphorist  explains: 

■The  soul,  though  all-pervading,  resides  only  in  one  mind  that  bears 
the  impressions  of  all  past  actions.  The  new  minds  cannot  have  these 
impressions. 


906  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iv.  15 

refrnreforepsn  \\\w\ 

3TT%^T:  Entry  (i.e.  animation  occurs)  like  a  lamp; 

for  fltTT  so  gftlqfd  (the  scripture)  reveals. 

15 The  released  soul  can  animate  differe?it  bodies  like  a  lamp, 
for  the  scripture  shows  this  to  be  so. 

Just  as  a  single  lamp  can  appear  to  be  many  through  its  power 
of  transformation  (i.e.  lighting  up  other  lamps  from  itself),  so 
also  the  man  of  knowledge,  though  one,  can  through  his  divine 
power  become  many  and  enter  into  all  the  bodies  (to  animate 
them). 

How  can  this  be  so? 

Because  the  scripture  shows  it  thus  that  one  can  become 
many:  “He  remains  one,  he  becomes  threefold,  fivefold,”  etc. 
(Ch.  VII.  xxvi.  2).  This  cannot  be  possible  if  the  illustration  of 
the  wooden  puppets  be  accepted,  nor  can  it  be  possible  if  these 
are  understood  to  be  animated  by  other  souls.  And  bodies 
without  souls  can  have  no  movement.  As  for  the  argument  that 
since  the  mind  and  soul  cannot  be  separated,  there  is  no  possi¬ 
bility  for  the  soul  to  become  associated  with  many  bodies,  that 
creates  no  difficulty.  For  as  he  is  possessed  of  inevitable  will, 
he  will  create  bodies  equipped  with  minds  that  will  act  in  accord 
with  a  single  mind.  When  these  are  created,  the  same  soul  can 
also  appear  as  their  separate  rulers  in  conformity  with  the  differ¬ 
ences  in  the  limiting  adjuncts.  This  is  the  process  described  in 
the  Yoga  scriptures  as  well  about  the  assumption  of  many 
bodies  by  the  Yogins. 

Opponent :  How  again  can  it  be  admitted  that  a  liberated  man 
can  have  such  divine  powers  as  of  entering  into  many  bodies, 
since  texts  like,  “then  what  should  one  know  and  through 
what?  Through  what  should  one  know  that  owing  to  which 
all  this  is  known?”  (Bf.  IV.  v.  IS),  “But  there  is  not  that  second 
thing  separated  from  it  which  it  can  know”  (Br.  IV.  iii.  30),  “It 
becomes  transparent  like  water — one,  the  witness,  and  without  a 
second”  (Bj\  IV.  iii.  32),  and  other  texts  of  this  kind  deny  the 
existence  of  particularized  knowledge? 

Vedantin  :  Hence  comes  the  answer  of  the  aphorist: 


IV. iv.  17]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA$YA  907 

lfc*fcT  ff  ll^ll 

gp^R-3T^fnt  From  either  of  the  two  viewpoints 
of  deep  sleep  and  absolute  union;  because 
(this  is)  made  clear  (in  the  Upani?ad). 

16.  (The  declaration  of  the  absence  of  particularized  know - 
ledge  is  made)  from  either  of  the  two  points  of  view ,  viz  deep 
sleep  and  absolute  union;  for  this  is  made  clear  in  the  Upanisad. 

Svdpyaya  (lit.  merger  in  oneself)  means  deep  sleep,  as  is 
shown  in  the  Upani$adic  text,  “He  becomes  merged  in  his  Self, 
and  that  is  why  they  speak  of  him  thus:  ‘He  is  deep  asleep’  (lit. 
‘He  is  in  his  Self)”  (Ch.  VI.  viii.  1).  And  sampatti  (lit.  attain¬ 
ment  of  a  state)  means  liberation,  as  shown  by  the  Upani$adic 
text,  “Having  been  Brahman,  he  becomes  Brahman”  (Bp.  IV. 
iv.  6).  Having  in  view  either  of  these  two  states,  it  is  asserted 
thus  that  there  is  an  absence  of  particularized  knowledge.  This 
is  said  sometimes  in  relation  to  the  state  of  deep  sleep  and  some¬ 
times  to  absolute  liberation. 

How  is  this  known? 

Because  this  is  made  clear  by  the  Upani$ad  under  a  context 
dealing  with  that  very  subject  in  such  sentences  as,  “The  Self 
comes  out  as  a  separate  entity  from  these  elements  and  the 
separateness  is  destroyed  with  them.  (After  attaining  this  one¬ 
ness  it  has  no  more  particular  consciousness)”  (Bp.  II.  iv.  12), 
“But  when  to  the  knower  of  Brahman  everything  has  become 
the  Self”  (Bp.  II.  iv.  14),  “Where  falling  asleep  he  craves  no 
desire  and  sees  no  dream”  (Bp.  IV.  iii.  19,  Ma.  5).  But  the  state 
in  which  the  divine  powers  are  asserted  is  a  different  state  like 
heaven  etc.,  that  comes  as  a  result  of  the  maturity  of  meditation 
on  the  qualified  Brahman.  Hence  there  is  no  defect. 

Topic  7:  Acquisition  of  Divine  Powers 

Doubt :  Do  those  people,  who  attain  union  with  God,  while 
still  having  minds,  acquire  unlimited  or  limited  divine  powers, 
as  a  result  of  meditation  on  the  qualified  Brahman?  What 
should  be  the  conclusion? 


908 


BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA 


[IV.  iv.  17 


Opponent :  Their  divine  power  should  be  without  any  limita¬ 
tion,  as  is  obvious  from  the  Upani$adic  texts,  “He  himself  gets 
independent  sovereignty”  (Tai.  I.  vi.  2),  “All  the  gods  carry 
presents  to  him”  (Tai.  I.  v.  3),  “They  get  freedom  of  movement 
in  all  the  worlds”  (Ch.  VIII.  i.  6,  VII.  xxv.  2). 

Vedantin  :  To  this  the  aphorist  replies: 


II  Wl 


(The  released  soul  gets  all  the  divine  powers) 
barring  the  power  of  running  this  universe,  (as  is  known) 

from  the  context  ^  and  from  non-contiguity. 


11.  The  released  soul  gets  all  the  divine  powers  except  that  of 
running  the  universe  (with  its  creation y  continuance ,  and  dissolu¬ 
tion),  as  is  known  from  the  context  (which  deals  with  God) 
and  from  the  non-proximity  (of  the  individual  soul). 

It  is  proper  that  barring  the  power  of  creation  etc.  of  the 
universe,  the  liberated  souls  should  have  all  the  other  divine 
powers  like  becoming  very  minute  etc.  The  power,  however, 
of  creation  etc.  of  the  universe  can  reasonably  belong  to  God 
alone  who  exists  eternally. 

Why  should  it  be  so? 

Since  God  forms  the  subject-matter  of  that  topic,  the  others 
being  far  from  being  considered  there.  For  the  supreme  Lord 
alone  has  competence  for  activities  concerning  (the  creation 
etc.  of)  the  universe,  inasmuch  as  the  fact  of  creation  etc.  is 
taught  in  connection  with  Him  alone,  and  the  word  “eternal” 
is  attributed  to  Him.  The  Upani$ads  mention  that  others  get 
the  divine  powers  of  becoming  atomic  in  size  etc.  as  a  result 
of  search  and  hankering  for  knowing  Him.  Thus  they  are 
remotely  placed  from  the  activities  connected  with  creation  etc. 
of  the  universe.  Moreover,  from  the  very  fact  that  the  liberated 
souls  are  equipped  with  minds,  they  cannot  have  any  unanimity, 
so  that  someone  may  at  one  time  want  the  continuance  of  the 
universe  and  someone  else  its  destruction;  in  this  way  they  may 
at  times  be  opposed  to  one  another.  If  then  one  should  seek  a 
reconciliation  by  making  all  other  wills  dependent  on  one  will 


IV.  iv.  19] 


BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHASYA 


909 


only,  then  that  reconciler  will  perforce  arrive  at  the  conclusion 
that  all  other  wills  are  dependent  on  God’s  will  alone. 

si^ta&nfcffcr  ii 

(The  powers  of  the  liberated  soul  are  unlimited)  9^51-3^1 
owing  to  direct  scriptural  declaration  if  this  be  the 

objection,  then  ?r  not  so,  since  it  is  (the 

attainment)  of  Him  (i.e.  God)  who  appoints  others  as  lords 
of  the  spheres  and  resides  in  those  spheres  that  is  spoken  of. 

18.  .If  it  be  held  ( that  the  powers  of  the  liberated  soul  are 
unlimited )  owing  to  direct  scriptural  declaration ,  then  it  is  not  so, 
since  it  is  (the  attainment)  of  Him  (i.e.  God)  who  appoints 
others  as  lords  of  the  spheres  and  resides  in  those  spheres  that  is 
spoken  of  (in  the  Upani$ad). 

The  statement  was  made  earlier  that  from  such  direct  teaching 
as  “He  himself  gets  independent  sovereignty”  (Tai.  I.  vi.  2),  it  is 
but  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  liberated  souls  get  unfettered 
divine  powers.  That  has  to  be  refuted.  As  to  that,  it  is  said  that 
this  is  nothing  damaging,  “since  it  is  God,  appointing  others  to 
their  respective  spheres  and  Himself  residing  in  those  spheres 
that  is  spoken  of”  (ih  the  Upani$ad).  It  is  declared  that 
this  bestowing  of  independent  sovereignty  is  at  the  disposal 
of  God  who  ordains  others  to  be  the  rulers  of  partic¬ 
ular  spheres  and  who  resides  in  such  special  abodes  as  the 
orb  of  the  sun.  It  is  because  of  this  that  a  little  later  the 
Upani$ad  says,  “He  attains  the  lord  of  the  mind”  (Tai.  I.  vi. 
2),  which  amounts  to  saying  that  he  attains  God  who  is  the  lord 
of  all  minds  and  who  is  ever  present  there  as  a  pre-existing  reality. 
It  is  in  line  with  this  that  the  Upani$ad  says  still  later,  “He 
becomes  the  ruler  of  speech,  the  ruler  of  eyes,  the  ruler  of  ears, 
the  ruler  of  knowledge”  (ibid).  Thus  in  other  places  also  the 
texts  are  to  be  construed  as  far  as  possible  to  mean  that  their 
divine  powers  are  attained  at  the  behest  of  God  alone  who  exists 
eternally. 

fiWKMfd  ^  cTCT  %  farfbnf  HUH 

*  And  (there  is  a  form  of  the  supreme  Lord  which)  fspiTTT- 


910  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA$YA  [IV.  iv.  19 

arefcf  does  not  abide  in  the  effect,  ff?  because  3TTf  (the  Upani$ad) 
has  stated  (His)  existence  ^pqn  in  that  manner. 

19.  And  there  is  another  form  of  the  supreme  Lord  that  does 
not  abide  in  the  effect ,  for  so  has  the  Upanifad  declared. 

And  it  is  not  a  fact  that  the  supreme  Lord  resides  merely  in 
the  solar  orb  etc.,  within  the  range  of  effects  (i.e.  changeable 
things);  He  has  also  another  aspect  which  is  eternally  free  and 
transcendental  to  all  changes.  Thus  it  is  that  the  scripture  speaks 
of  His  existence  in  two  forms  in,  “His  divine  majesty  spreads 
that  far;  the  whole  universe  of  all  these  beings  is  but  a  quadrant 
of  His.  But  Puru$a  (the  infinite  Being)  is  greater  even  than  that, 
His  three  immortal  quadrants  being  established  in  His  own 
effulgence”  (Ch.  III.  xii.  6),  and  other  passages.  It  cannot  be 
asserted  that  this  changeless  aspect  is  attained  by  those  who 
stick  to  the  other  (qualified)  aspect,  for  they  have  no  desire 
for  that.  Hence  it  is  to  be  understood  that  just  as  with  regard 
to  the  supreme  Lord,  possessed  of  two  aspects,  one  may  continue 
in  His  qualified  aspect  possessing  limited  powers  without  attain¬ 
ing  His  unqualified  aspect,  so  also  one  can  exist  in  His  qualified 
aspect  with  limited  divine  powers  without  acquiring  unfettered 
powers. 


SIcTOFTR-ft  IRoll 

^  And  sr^TCT-3P|JTT^  direct  knowledge  (i.e.  Upani$ads)  and 
inference  (i.e.  Smrti)  show  thus. 

20.  And  both  the  Upani$adic  and  Smrti  texts  show  thus  (that 
the  supreme  Light  is  beyond  all  changing  things). 

The  Upani$adic  and  Smrti  texts  also  show  that  the  supreme 
Light  is  transcendental  to  all  changes,  in  such  passages  as,  “There 
the  sun  does  not  shine,  neither  do  the  moon  and  the  stars,  nor 
do  these  flashes  of  lightning  shine.  How  can  this  fire?  He 
shining,  all  these  shine;  through  His  lustre  are  all  these  variously 
illumined”  (Ka.  II.  ii.  15,  Sv.  VI.  14,  Mu.  II.  ii.  10)?  “The  sun 
does  not  illuminate  that,  nor  the  moon,  nor  fire”  (Gita,  XV.  6). 


IV.iv.22]  BRAHMA  -  SOTRA  -  BHA§YA  911 

Thus  it  is  a  well-known  fact  that  the  supreme  Light  is  beyond 
all  changing  things.  This  is  the  idea. 


Also  ^-qre-ffr^-f&^from  the  indicatory  mark  (in  the 
Upani$ads)  about  the  equality  of  mere  experience. 

21.  Also  from  the  indicatory  mark  in  the  Upani$ads  about  the 
equality  of  experience  alone  (it  is  known  that  the  liberated  souls 
do  not  get  unfettered  powers). 

Here  is  an  additional  reason  to  show  that  those  who  hold 
on  to  the  effect  (i.e.  the  conditioned  Brahman)  do  not  get 
unfettered  powers;  for  from  the  indicatory  marks  declaring  their 
difference  as  contained  in  the  following  Upani$adic  passages,  it 
is  clear  that  all  that  they  have  in  common  with  the  eternally 
existing  God  is  an  equality  of  experience  only:  e.g.  “He  (i.e. 
Hir  any  agar  bha)  said  to  him  (when  he  had  reached  His  world), 
‘The  liquid  nectar  alone  is  enjoyed  by  Me,  for  you  also  it  is  the 
thing  to  be  enjoyed’”  (Kau.  I.  7),  “As  all  beings  adore  this 
Deity,  so  do  they  adore  him  (who  knows  Him)”  (Bj\  I.  v.  20), 
“Through  it  he  attains  (gradual)  identity  (or  equality  of  body) 
with  the  Deity,  or  lives  in  the  same  world  with  Him”  (Bj. 
I.  v.  23). 

Opponent :  From  such  a  point  of  view  the  powers  will  have 
degrees  and  so  they  will  be  subject  to  termination.  Hence  these 
liberated  souls  will  be  liable  to  returning  to  this  world. 

Vedantin :  Hence  follows  the  reply  of  the  venerable  teacher 
Badarayaoa: 

There  is  no  return  on  the  authority  of  scrip¬ 
tures,  3RT|fTT:  no  return  on  the  authority  of  scriptures. 

22.  There  is  no  return  for  the  released  souls  on  the  strength  of 
the  Upani$adic  declaration;  there  is  no  return  for  the  released 
souls  on  the  strength  of  the  Upanifadic  declaration. 


912  BRAHMA  -  SCTRA  -  BHA§YA  [IV.iv.22 

Those  who  proceed  along  the  path  of  the  gods,  associated 
with  the  nerves  and  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  divided  into  the 
stages  of  light  etc.,  reach  the  world  of  Brahman  as  described 
in  the  scripture  thus:  In  the  world  of  Brahman,  existing  in  the 
third  order  of  heaven  (i.e.  Brahma-loka)  counted  from  this  earth, 
there  exist  two  seas  called  Ara  and  Nya ,  where  is  to  be  found  a 
lake  full  of  delightful  food,  where  exists  a  banian  tree  exuding 
ambrosia,  where  is  to  be  seen  a  city  of  Brahman  called  Aparajita 
(the  unconquered),  and  where  stands  a  golden  palace  made 
by  the  Lord  Himself  (Ch.  VIII.  v.  3).  That  world  is  also 
spoken  of  variously  in  the  mantra  and  eulogistic  ( arthavada ) 
portions.  After  reaching  there,  they  do  not  return  as  others  do 
from  the  world  of  Moon  when  deprived  of  their  enjoyment  (i.e. 
having  run  through  their  quota  of  experience). 

How  is  this  known? 

From  such  Upani$adic  passages  as,  “Going  up  through  that 
nerve  one  gets  immortality”  (Ka.  II.  iii.  16;  Ch.  VIII.  vi.  6), 
“They  no  more  return  to  this  world”  (Bf.  VI.  ii.  15),  “Those 
who  proceed  along  this  path  of  the  gods  do  not  return  to  this 
human  cycle  of  birth  and  death  (in  Manu’s  creation)”  (Ch.  IV. 
xv.  5),  “He  reaches  the  world  of  Brahman  and  does  not  return 
here”  (Ch.  VIII.  xv.  1).  And  even  though  their  powers  come 
to  an  end  in  time,  it  was  shown  how  one  has  no  return  under 
the  aphorism,  “On  the  final  dissolution  of  the  world  of  the 
conditioned  Brahman,  they  attain  along  with  the  Lord  of  that 
world  what  is  higher  than  that  conditioned  Brahman”  (IV.  iii. 
10).  But  non-return  stands  as  an  accomplished  fact  for  those 
from  whom  the  darkness  (of  ignorance)  has  been  completely 
removed  as  a  result  of  their  full  illumination  and  who  therefore 
cling  to  that  liberation  as  their  highest  goal  which  exists  ever  as 
an  already  established  fact.  The  non-return  of  those  who  take 
refuge  in  the  qualified  Brahman  becomes  a  fact  only  because 
they  too  have  that  unconditioned  Brahman  as  their  ultimate 
resort.  The  repetition  of  the  portion,  “There  is  no  return  on 
the  strength  of  the  Upani$adic  declaration”,  shows  that  the 
scripture  ends  here. 


INDEX  TO  SOTRAS 

( Figures  indicate  Chapter,  Section,  and  Sutra  respectively) 


ar'srt  qrer«Tq&ngo 

II. 

iii. 

43 

II. 

iv. 

11 

aren:f^Tt 

III. 

ill. 

33 

I. 

iii. 

10 

arfa^tqifc  go 

IV. 

i. 

16 

<H<»^Tf?*lfg^irir<(do 

III. 

i. 

4 

3T^RS3T*g  ffo 

III. 

iii. 

55 

arPf^rgqq^ 

II. 

ii. 

8 

3Tff^  WSFHTR: 

III. 

iii. 

61 

3R55^  !5n^fJI 

IV. 

9 

am?** 

II. 

iv. 

7 

3m^ 

II. 

iv. 

13 

3RP^  qr 

I. 

iii. 

29 

arat^r  ^ 

IV. 

ii. 

2 

III. 

iv. 

25 

arag*  ^T^rrfqq%: 

IV. 

iv. 

9 

3RT^  ^PTTo 

III. 

ii. 

18 

3RTtrq  ^  ^TdT  g?T  ^ 

I. 

ii. 

27 

anrg?r  srm: 

I. 

l. 

23 

aid:  snrtots^ng 

III. 

ii. 

8 

arasm^sfa  arfiffw 

IV. 

ii. 

20 

^fdf^ccid^',,'r^  jxfto 

III. 

iv. 

39 

arfd&rr^ 

III. 

iii. 

46 

aratsfr^r  d*nfgo 

III. 

ii. 

26 

ajdts^rrfq  gT^qig 

IV. 

i. 

17 

3 TW  ^TT^<^lk| 

I. 

ii. 

9 

amrat  s^rfanmn 

I. 

i. 

1 

ais^cqir<,]yiqjt° 

I. 

ii. 

21 

are^TPnnira; 

II. 

iii. 

51 

arftpfr  g  2r?fa*mg 

II. 

i. 

22 

arfWlq&ngo 

III. 

iv. 

8 

arf^SFng’TTtT^' 

II. 

ii. 

39 

ar«Pi^mcr: 

III. 

iv. 

12 

arqftm  Tf 

III. 

iv. 

35 

anraR-mckdwrei^o 

I. 

ii. 

17 

3PTTT«Wnf  IpTo 

IV. 

i. 

15 

iii. 

iv. 

50 

IV. 

iv. 

22 

3Tfr*r*r: 

III. 

31 

III. 

i. 

12 

argf^TFT  =q 

I. 

iii. 

22 

argsrrqfr^TTt  ^o 

II. 

iii. 

48 

anjqq^g  *r  qrrftr: 

I. 

ii. 

3 

arg^rrfipqT:  jrito 

III. 

iii. 

50 

arRTR'q:® 

III. 

iv. 

19 

arg^sfcfr: 

I. 

ii. 

30 

anpgfa? 

II. 

ii. 

25 

3l»PT  ^4*ldcdgo 

III. 

ii. 

37 

3RTT  sqqrl: 

I. 

ii. 

13 

3Ffnr  ^Tfq  g  crg-r£: 

ui. 

iv. 

36 

anriTi  gairmgo 

III. 

iii. 

35 

3RTTT  tWR^o 

II. 

iii. 

15 

oi,riiiT*-qf^<<idif?go 

I. 

ii. 

18 

3ffcP?T^T?R5raT  ar 

II. 

ii. 

41 

3PrT?d3^ftq^TTg 

I. 

i. 

20 

aRjnarffcrete^tajfto 

II. 

ii. 

36 

oM^l'4 Wl^l  ?Io 

II. 

ii. 

5 

3r^«n^  ^i®<iRf%<> 

III. 

iii. 

6 

apqxngfiTdl 

II. 

ii. 

9 

ar^mT  ^^qqfgfrfoo 

\3  ^ 

III. 

iii. 

36 

I. 

iii. 

12 

apinf«rf^q  <j4**go 

III. 

i. 

24 

ar?q7*r  g  srfafa:  ° 

I. 

iv. 

18 

aRrro*1?  q^PRT: 

I. 

iii. 

20 

apginMg  %g  ?qigo 

III. 

iii. 

17 

anfr^i^RiiTigo 

II. 

ii. 

17 

58 


914 


INDEX  TO  SCTRAS 


3Tfa  ^ 

III. 

i. 

15 

arfa  ^ 

I. 

iii. 

23 

yy  yy 

II. 

iii. 

45 

yy  yy 

III. 

iv. 

30 

yy  +yy 

III. 

iv. 

37 

arfq 

III. 

ii. 

13 

arfq  ^  5rc*rer<> 

III. 

ii. 

24 

3PM  ^5IW?o 

II. 

i. 

8 

IV. 

iii. 

15 

3RT^T 

III. 

iv. 

29 

ar*rra  «nqR<.i^  ^ 

IV. 

iv. 

10 

arfarajta^rr^ 

I. 

iv. 

24 

arfwr^siTT^r^o 

II. 

i. 

5 

I. 

ii. 

29 

arfVwremf^fq 

II. 

iii. 

52 

arvfniilscirqf^n^Tg; 

II. 

ii. 

6 

^To 

III. 

ii. 

19 

III. 

ii. 

14 

3rf%nf^TT  dqirfat: 

IV. 

iii. 

1 

.  I. 

ii. 

7 

aTPT^%frfcT%fT^4d^ 

I. 

iii. 

21 

areft*ifira$r<aiTfefao 

II. 

iii. 

24 

I. 

iv. 

22 

3rf^”*n*t5T 

IV. 

iv. 

4 

arftr^pft 

IV. 

ii. 

16 

II. 

iii. 

23 

III. 

i. 

25 

II. 

i. 

23 

ar^r^rf^T^rg;® 

III. 

i. 

6 

arsfa  ^rfeftTd^o 

II. 

ii. 

21 

II. 

i. 

7 

artra^M^lliifr  ^vT° 

II. 

i. 

17 

II. 

iii. 

49 

1 

% 

1 

II. 

iii. 

9 

arcnsrfaqjt 

III. 

iv. 

10 

arferq 

II. 

iii. 

2 

srftHVTW  T  5RfW  «5TTf^T  I. 

i. 

19 

31^^  35GRT 

IV. 

ii. 

11 

®rm$r 

3n^Rftssqf^^Tr?o 

3TMKd$MI<J 


3nr*T^:  lf<IJll*ll^ 
3rE*njftRrfTT^fo 
3nr*rfr  =??  faf^o 

3TTcET  STm'J|ic| 
3TE%f%  g;qii-°#do 
aTTTqWW: 

3TIWIMW  JPTto 
3TT!T??n?frs«Trai^ 
STI^T^T:  STNM44o 
srmqqMr  ^?To 

amf: 

ammr  ^  ^ 

STPTCfof  =I^Tfwj 
STTfa^fa^l^tfiro 

armta:  swpnq; 

3TT^ 

S[d<7RWlfaT 
■^d  ^ 

c3«TdmMT^ 

ScftlT  ^T^qasw : 

^iH^rq; 


I.  i.  22 
II.  ii.  24 
I.  iii.  41 

III.  iv.  3 

IV.  iii.  4 
I.  iv.  26 

III.  iii.  16 
II.  i.  28 

III.  iii.  15 

IV.  iv.  3 
IV.  i.  3 

III.  iii.  40 

IV.  i.  6 
III.  iii.  14 

I.  i.  12 
III.  iii.  11 

III.  i.  10 
I.  iv.  1 

II.  iii.  11 

IV.  i.  12 
II.  iii.  50 

I.  ii.  32 

III.  iv.  45 

IV.  i.  1 
IV.  i.  7 

III.  ii.  16 

I.  iii.  18 
II.  i.  21 

IV.  i.  14 
II.  ii.  19 

III.  iii.  13 
II.  i.  2 
III.  iii.  34 


I.  iii.  13 
I.  i.  5 


INDEX  TO  SOTRAS 


915 


I.  iv.  21 
II.  iii.  19 

x*ti  <UM  4d*q 

I.  iii.  19 

=q  <j4  farter^ 

II.  ii.  20 

II.  ii.  42 

^i*flHHwfq  ^r  fafo 

II.  ii.  27 

Sq^T^RTfo  %ro 

I.  i.  27 

;jqq^ 

III.  ii.  35 

WRlt  ^lunMrtV^  Tf 

11.  i.  36 

w 

I 

i 

>111.  iii.  30 

^(4*Tfa  ?%%  •>TT^o 

III.  iv.  42 

II.  iv.  16 

^Msfssr  >T: 

II.  iii.  37 

^9?Tj5i  <.<*31  Tiiv(fh’ 

II.  i.  24 

^SHTtS<tf?teT3o 

III.  iii.  5 

'3wf*lH<ixi3fl60 

III.  iii.  41 

11.  iii.  35 

^T*T«TT  ^  9Wr^ 

II.  ii.  16 

swtt  ^ 

11.  ii.  23 

T^q^rfq  q»*rfo 

II.  ii.  12 

T5Tq*qq^5TTrqo 

III.  ii.  27 

^nrs^nftfrrTo 

IV.  iii.  5 

3^<T:$  ^  ^  f| 

III.  iv.  17 

^q>  afT^qq :  $i  0t° 

III.  iii.  53 

t^frr  qTcrfoqTo 

II.  iii.  8 

tt^T  qW:  STcSfRT: 

II.  i.  3 

fWI'Tmlfro 

II.  i.  12 

l^T  oMI^Tdlo 

I.  iv.  28 

^  ^rcms^T^JJo 

II.  ii.  34 

t*4  ^nwVil^oii^o 

III.  iv.  52 

IV.  iv.  7 

^f^+H^5T^cro 

III.  iv.  51 

I.  iii.  39 

II.  ii.  40 

q^rf  qnrqm^rr^o 

II. 

iii. 

33 

qnrqrg  oq-q^qp^ 

I. 

ii. 

4 

I. 

iv. 

10 

III. 

iv. 

15 

+  IHT^T  fTT^THTteTT 

I. 

i. 

18 

qjTCrctarqo 

III. 

iii. 

39 

qn*mg  qqr° 

III. 

iii. 

60 

+Kul^d  ^TTT 

I. 

iv. 

14 

?RfTT?JT 

IV. 

iii. 

7 

qqqfeqTqrq^qq 

III. 

iii. 

18 

IV. 

iii. 

10 

^T5nT^T^T?go 

II. 

iii. 

42 

fdRq^qrqqT^ 

III. 

i. 

8 

^F^PTTqTrTo 

III. 

iv. 

48 

II. 

i. 

26 

QrPqqRqr^q 

11. 

fi. 

31 

srf^T^r^Kto 

I. 

iii. 

35 

nfasi^iwrio 

I. 

iii. 

15 

qfd^rqT^Tg; 

I. 

i. 

10 

ir%r4qfq^prqo 

III. 

iii. 

29 

^rqiqi^qo 

III. 

iii. 

64 

II. 

iii. 

25 

^f  qfq^didio 

I. 

ii. 

11 

I. 

i. 

6 

II. 

,  iii. 

3 

II. 

iv. 

2 

II. 

iv. 

10 

I. 

,  iv. 

8 

^wfcfir  =^?ftqwriro 

III. 

i. 

9 

S4T^> 

II. 

iii. 

16 

IV. 

.  iv 

6 

3F?cT 

III. 

iii 

28 

3p?tf*T4MI5ifa  ^5T<> 

I. 

1 

25 

STTSTfar^TcT 
'SingSIRTT^r  W^TTWo 

I. 

IV 

iv. 

.  iv 

16 

.17 

916 


INDEX  TO  SOTRAS 


SRTTsrcq  dd: 

I. 

i. 

2 

srr«i  fa^fHrfd  o 

I. 

iv. 

17 

I. 

i. 

31 

STdcdl^di  I'd 

I. 

iv. 

4 

dtsd  <Jd 

II. 

iii. 

18 

ddYdTTdfWTd  d° 

II. 

iv. 

14 

Sd'tfdTj'mrTT  ddT* 

I. 

iv. 

9 

SdtfdtddTd  " 

I. 

iii. 

40 

WfddidTd 

I. 

i. 

24 

3d>fdfd  didrsd 

I. 

iii. 

32 

3d'tfdd%drdd?dd 

I. 

iv. 

13 

?f  ^sdrfa  dSMMo 

II. 

iv. 

17 

III. 

iv. 

4 

dfedtsfa  ddd  ■  o 

IV. 

iii. 

3 

dd  fTH'q^Td 

I. 

i. 

4 

ddjdd>dTT5Td: 

II. 

iv. 

4 

d<pn4>dfod 

II. 

iv. 

3 

ddTfa  d  dSdTTTdfo 

III. 

i. 

16 

ddrd  dddfd 

II. 

iii. 

27 

ddrdd?drddd>Td;  TRI 

III. 

iv. 

24 

ddrsdsrfd^did 

III. 

ii. 

36 

ddT  dldT : 

II. 

iv. 

t 

ddfddd  ddT^dfdo 

IV. 

i. 

13 

dddld?dT4d  dd 

I. 

,  iv. 

3 

d^d^TeddrTPPTd^Tfevd:  II.  i. 

14 

<M fd^TTiV 

III. 

1 

III. 

7 

I. 

iii 

37 

iii 

13 

d<°44ddl^  ff 

III. 

23 

ddirfl%;  ddK«rr^rRi 

IV. 

ii 

8 

*K<J*TO:o 

I. 

iii 

26 

crctafotlvqsH  cfcSW>ro 

VI. 

ii 

17 

d^^itiKc^lTt  fl’fi’MR&T: 

oil. 

iii 

29 

I. 

i 

14 

d$«jd*d  ^  dRTgtfdto 

III. 

iv 

40 

dSdt  fddTdT?{ 

III. 

iv 

6 

dfdd  T  <dl  fainr?d?S'2: « 

III. 

iii. 

42 

dfd<2*d  dfelta&Ud 

I. 

i. 

7 

ST<T  TtRTcT 

IV. 

ii. 

3 

IV. 

iv. 

13 

II. 

i. 

11 

cT^7  ^ 

II. 

iv. 

16 

<rrfa  ^ 

IV. 

ii. 

15 

^  ^K*} 

III. 

iv. 

9 

gcft^5T«^Rf^r: 

III. 

i. 

21 

^3fts=T^TT  ^ 

II. 

iii. 

10 

ddTon^d  td^ddld:® 

I. 

iv. 

6 

^KH°bcq  I  tI  ^T^rcT 

III. 

i. 

2 

^f^TT^T 

III. 

i. 

20 

33 

III. 

ii. 

21 

3  5 

III. 

iii. 

48 

33 

III. 

iii. 

66 

13 

IV. 

iii. 

13 

ddddddd  ddn&PJdl% 

IV. 

iv. 

20 

dddfd  d 

III. 

iii. 

4 

93 

III. 

iii. 

22 

dddfd  dTdt  dfd  *dd% 

III. 

ii. 

17 

dfT  dd ^=d: 

I. 

iii. 

14 

?dd^  ^ 

II. 

i. 

6 

ddrfdddfd  dt% 

II. 

i. 

25 

d^dtnTST  dlsfq- 

III. 

ii. 

6 

*TVq|*l*H 

I. 

iii. 

1 

5  r^i^q^H^Pq^f  o 

IV. 

iv. 

12 

dddftrfddd^fd 

III. 

40 

ddfadddd 

I. 

9 

tjfod  dffcflSdirffdo 

I. 

16 

IV. 

8 

d  4>dffddTdTfdfd  ddo 

II 

35 

«r  ^ 

II. 

43 

d  d  did  srfdddrfdo 

IV. 

14 

d  d  ddfdTd’dfddtdto 

II. 

35 

INDEX  TO  SOTRAS 


917 


T  T  ?TraT?r?Tff7To 

i. 

ii. 

19 

*T  TTfr+tR+HlMo 

hi. 

iv. 

41 

®T  d  f^RDTTTRi; 

ii. 

i. 

9 

d  ^dl*l 

hi. 

i. 

18 

•T  Sdt%  dff  T: 

IV. 

i. 

4 

*T  Snftdddrdrd 

II. 

i. 

32 

H  TTTtVJM<fJ®N : 

II. 

ii. 

30 

*T  iFnFdfd  TT  JR^^o 

III. 

ii. 

12 

*T  dddTT?T>Td5nFdfd° 

I. 

i. 

29 

d  dT  : 

III. 

iii. 

65 

•T  «TT  JI+ middled  FI© 

III. 

iii. 

7 

d  dl<jFvl  ^d^Td^TT^ 

II. 

iv. 

9 

d  dT  fd^ldRT, 

III. 

iii. 

21 

d  fddd1^: 

II. 

iii. 

1 

d  fd^dcdldFI© 

II. 

i. 

4 

d  T^TPRnTfirfTo 

I. 

iv. 

11 

5f  mVWTi&g&Siq  o 

III. 

iii. 

51 

d  SdrddlsFd  TT*d>o 

III. 

ii. 

11 

^To 

II. 

iii. 

21 

TTPaf^ir  fofrrre 

III. 

i. 

23 

dTtdTd%fdcdc<»i®'i  © 

II. 

iii. 

17 

did!  STsdlfafald.. 

III. 

iii. 

58 

I. 

iii. 

3 

^TPTFT  S<T*55«f: 

II. 

ii. 

28 

«TTfa$l1TRT^ 

III. 

iv. 

13 

II. 

ii. 

26 

fdcd^d  =d  dTdTd, 

II. 

ii. 

14 

II. 

iii. 

32 

fdddT^ 

III. 

iv. 

7 

FddtdK  =d3F  y»ddSd 

III. 

ii. 

2 

fdfar  ftfd  drsFdfd© 

IV. 

ii. 

19 

^Rt5TTM: 

I 

.  i. 

16 

ddrfFd^Tddt  F^ 

IV. 

ii. 

6 

d+fcdSRIJ-'ddTd, 

II 

.  ii. 

33 

dtTdddTd: 

IV. 

ii. 

10 

dd^fwd  dtdj' ddfddd% 

II. 

iv. 

12 

II. 

i. 

19 

<TWT:  ^IfH^ETo 
'TW 

<mP*T«rMM  fWTtf^fo 
7TTT3T  Tfirf'TTTfeTro 
T^T  T  5T«5*T  cTTfgtTfo 
ITU'-Mq  |  ^To 

'TRTTF^TtTTT  T?fto 
^Wp^HlfaT 
^WPTfST:  9i®<5ir?fa<> 
'IwwM'Wrm  It 
'JT  <T  TTTTTT'jft  |^o 
’JTTTT 

lJ=rFd't><*l :  Jf+<.w||5[o 
5*^pTT5n^ 


«+'<«!  I 


n+<«ng; 

SI^nrrf?T5TTT$lcT  o 
sr^Ru^r^TT  tt: 
snn^nwzmg'T 

5rferr«i^fo 
T^cRTRrT  f^  5rfd*Io 

TfdurfW  f^rfpnw^ 

T^wrfrfTToTRi^o 

jrF^TT^r 
5rf^TF?F<T  T?T° 
srfd*o?4iy  Fdd^rFr  o 
TcT^ftTT^nfrf^  Tvfo 
jpr^«RorrfTf^ 


I. 

iii. 

43 

II. 

ii. 

37 

II. 

ii. 

3 

IV. 

iii. 

12 

III. 

ii. 

31 

II. 

iii. 

41 

III. 

ii. 

5 

III. 

iv. 

18 

III. 

iii. 

52 

III. 

iv. 

23 

II. 

iii. 

31 

III. 

iii. 

24 

III. 

iv. 

1 

II. 

ii. 

7 

III. 

ii. 

41 

III. 

ii. 

29 

III. 

iii. 

45 

II. 

iii. 

28 

II. 

iii. 

12 

I 

.  ii. 

10 

I. 

iii. 

6 

III. 

ii. 

15 

III. 

ii! 

25 

II. 

iii. 

46 

III. 

ii. 

28 

I. 

iv. 

23 

III. 

ii. 

22 

I. 

iv. 

20 

II. 

iii. 

6 

III. 

ii. 

30 

IV. 

ii. 

12 

II. 

ii. 

22 

IV. 

iv. 

18 

III. 

i. 

5 

T<I*H4T  III.  iii.  43 

5RlTO?TOW^o  IV.  iv.  15 

TT^rrf^Frr  T^TRPTfar^  II.  iii.  53 


918 

SPfWW 

5T|U|^T=Tf 
srmcKTT  5i®^ 
sn>*lfd«US>T4Hld, 
srpm^t  ?ryrehid. 
fspTfaT*^rasnfii° 

^TO.‘ 

^r^W’TTSpro 
*[4^' :  TlT^g 

sTT^FT  fafow 

dlcHfav^igo 

>n^  ^fafafa^VI  o 
*TTT  g  ^RTT^Wtsf^T 
*nc^is*T^r 
TTI%^>T555^: 

^TT%  4IiJSg 

1}»mr  SRfKR^JH  <  5TI  d 

g**T: 

^53tR?5TT^' 

■$^rr?5ng 

^iFmTPnmr^go 

^*nrnr«T«rrv5^i^ 

mf^c^To 

jj^Tf^s^nRwra^rf^  o 
V’iq»iTqi 
+)'qiR4JTSfarfa: 
*T?>{Kd£T 


INDEX  TO  SOTRAS 


II.  ii.  2 

I.  iii.  17 

III.  i.  3 

I. iii.  4 

II.  iv.  15 

I.  i.  28 
I.iv.  12 

III.  iii.  12 

RTflTfe  3T5TT5|5^o 

m^DTTT  g 
»pRT:  srfcT^RTg 
gwW^pTaiiwiig 
»f%ST*nPT%:  Tf^ro 

III.  ii.  38 

TOHrai  dqlRShiq^ 

III.  iv.  43 

wr  ^  ^rarlwiT 

III.  ii.  33 

^  stouR 

IV.  i.  5 

IV.  iv.  5 

^iqqKRHlfd^T®^'  ?To 

III.  i.  7 

g  Rnrnfto 

IV.  iv.  1 1 

g#:  5T^T^TT^r 

I.  iii.  33 

jfrfn^r:  5rfr  ^ 

III.  iv.  22 

II.  i.  15 

srftrg 

IV.  iv.  14 

I.  i.  26 

IV.  ii.  5 

I.  iii.  8 

III.  iii.  57 

I.  i.  17 

^rf^Vrtsq 

I.  i.  21 

I.  iii.  5 
II.  iv.  18 

fw  1  d  P4 

III.  iii.  2 

^1+ q  tt »l  'rti  ®t» 

II.  i.  13 

dddlRr  ^rsr  wlo 

IV.  iv.  21 

IV.  i.  19 

4i^hRt  <9MI^o 

I.  iii.  31 

II.  iii.  44 

R+<«kdi^  #Tig<> 

III.  iii.  56 

fa+HUfq  fei  <xsH>**cq  iq^ 

II.  ii.  11 

d<4lR| 

I. iv.  7 

II.  iv.  21 
I.  i.  15 

III.  ii.  3 

IV.  iv.  2 
I.  iii.  2 

III.  ii.  10 

III.  iv.49 

IV.  i.ll 
II.  iii.  40 

II.  i.  20 
IV.  i.  18 

III.  iii.  32 
II.  iii.  30 
II.  iii.  7 

II.  i.  18 

IV.  ii.  21 

I.  iv.  27 

III.  i.  27 

II.  ii.  1 

IV.  ii.  18 

II.  ii.  15 

I.  ii.  23 

III.  i.  26 

III.  iii.  44 

IV.  i.  2 

II.  i.  33 

I.iv.  5 
I.  iv.  19 
IV.  ii.  1 
IV.  iii.  2 
II.  i.  31 

III.  iii.  59 

IV.  iv.  19 


INDEX  TO  SCTRAS 


919 


fairorssTsrra-  I.  i.  13 

ft?rr^T^n%  *rr  s?o  11.  ii.  44 

fW ?  ^  ftsrfwq;  III.  iii.  47 

f%rfer^¥  III .  i  v.  20 

F^lui  ^  ^TtSTo  II.  iii.  14 

f4srf^srn*r  II.  ii.  45 

II.  ii.  10 

fa*TPT:  5EPf^  III.  iv.  11 

f%rt^r:  ^vl°  I.  iii.  27 

IV.  iii.  16 

yr^4°4 M^l  1  W| i  o  I.  ii.  22 

I.  ii.  12 

F4$lNI-i«|«4  III.  iv.  38 

fa^rxt'rcsnq;  II.  iii.  34 

f%%nqt^T«Tir«UH?rM  III.  iv.  32 

III.  ii.  20 

ifcnspsfSt^  III.  iii.  25 

IV.  iii.  6 

^  *4«nferq;  11.  ii.  29 

II.  iv.  19 
35RfcT5K:  II.  iv.  22 

«lqi<»i9i®<5o  I.  ii.  24 

?!  m^sTcrra;  n.  i.  34 

III.  iii.  54 

®4fd  <!+ 1  fTTfanfaTO °  II.  ii.  4 

II.  iii.  26 

srf^rd  faf5TCf%°  III.  iii.  37 

fWTT  *0  II.  iii.  36 

fPTSRPj  III.  iii.  9 


5rf^rf4r4qTq; 

*T*?  5%  TO:  SPTo 

*a«4l««hm 


II.  iii.  38 
I.  iii.  28 
I.  ii.  5 
III.  iv.  31 
II.  iii.  4 


5!«3TfewftS^:  ?fa0To 

1. 

ii. 

26 

TfiET: 

1. 

iii. 

24 

TOTPTTf'To 

hi. 

iv. 

27 

^TRtTiqmsFT  ffo 

1. 

ii. 

20 

gr$5rto 

1. 

1. 

30 

5TT^q7fa?TO 

1. 

i. 

3 

hi. 

iii. 

62 

^^l^T^IquiTq-o 

1. 

iii. 

34 

hi. 

iv. 

2 

1. 

iii. 

38 

1. 

i. 

11 

hi. 

ii. 

39 

^hF*r 

m. 

iv. 

46 

11. 

1. 

27 

^  N  Pi  e*r>  <  km  f*TT  0 

1. 

ii. 

16 

hi. 

iii. 

49 

11. 

iv. 

8 

cT<> 

m. 

iii. 

8 

11. 

iv. 

20 

m. 

i. 

13 

^rV^l  <H<J  R^r?TT^TT^T  0 

1. 

iii. 

36 

*T  ^  ^rf^T^RjRfo 

hi. 

ii. 

9 

IV. 

iv. 

8 

1 

II. 

i. 

16 

III. 

ii. 

1 

^RnT^fwftrcTc^r^r 

II. 

iv. 

5 

III. 

iv. 

5 

II. 

ii. 

13 

I. 

iv. 

15 

II. 

iii. 

39 

*r*TRt£T 

III. 

iii. 

19 

I. 

iii. 

30 

tfiTRT  ^T^q^HTgo 

IV. 

ii. 

7 

III. 

iii. 

63 

II. 

ii. 

18 

^TvrfrpT  3rfafao 

I. 

ii. 

31 

#t° 

IV. 

iv. 

1 

920 


INDEX  TO  SOTRAS 


gr«r«JT$*qf?T4|Tf<l 

III. 

iii. 

20 

II 

.  ii. 

38 

trt: 

III. 

iii. 

23 

H^'t'mfcrfTfa  %?r 

I. 

ii. 

8 

I. 

ii. 

I 

11. 

ii. 

32 

III. 

iv. 

34 

II. 

i. 

37 

?r#%?T^rsRirif  ^ftsdT° 

III. 

iii. 

1 

SFRo 

III. 

iv. 

28 

*nrft«T  ^  wrfcs%° 

III. 

iv. 

26 

III. 

iii. 

10 

tiVPIdi  ^  di^RT^ 

II. 

i. 

30 

d^ddfe^T  d 

III. 

iv. 

33 

dfmdrcfaFsn 

III. 

iv. 

47 

^TpIcHlM^lHHI^ 

I. 

iv. 

25 

dTflTC'^rfaTtd  ■Si  Ph  fa: 

I. 

ii. 

28 

dT  ^  WITRT^ 

I. 

iii. 

11 

dT^TsqHPd  WM: 

III. 

i, 

,22 

HT*rr^^, 

III. 

ii. 

.32 

dTdfaiTd  ds*mw: 

IV. 

iii 

.  9 

ddsrprm^* 

III. 

iii 

.27 

III. 

i 

.11 

^  Pd  fe|tdTP49T4T44 0 

I. 

,  ii 

.15 

I. 

.iii 

.42 

d  % 

I, 

.  iv 

.  2 

^e?if  srcFTd^d  ddtdo 

IV. 

.  ii 

.  9 

fa  ^TN!3t» 

Ill 

!.  ii 

i.  4 

dd  fa  CTW 

III. 

.iii 

.38 

disarm  d^RTfewr: 

IV. 

.  ii 

.  4 

III. 

iv. 

14 

^f^Td^ldTdrfefdo 

III. 

iv. 

21 

^ZTTdf^TRWSrrfc  0 

III. 

ii. 

34 

m^PfamsiT5^ 

I. 

ii. 

14 

ftddTddpart  d 

I; 

iii. 

7 

IV. 

ii. 

13 

SdtfdT  d 

II. 

iii. 

47 

>> 

III. 

i. 

14 

)1 

IV. 

i. 

10 

d 

IV. 

ii. 

14 

WT^Spr  d  55^ 

III. 

i. 

19 

*wddPPFj*nd  FrrfcPd 

I. 

ii. 

25 

I. 

ii. 

6 

99 

IV. 

iii. 

11 

II. 

i. 

1 

d^ndd^ 

II. 

iii. 

5 

^dradtaT^d 

II. 

i. 

10 

II 

II. 

i. 

29 

=4 

II. 

iii. 

22 

SdT?ddT  didn't: 

II. 

iii. 

20 

gdlsdTdjq  ddltfrlo 

III. 

iii. 

3 

«|uiddm*d'k*ddTT® 

IV. 

iv. 

16 

W-441^ 

I. 

i. 

9 

SdTfad:  *6<!MSj<!P<.<:4l^d: 

III. 

iv. 

44 

fFdTdd^d  R-dd$dt° 

II. 

iv 

.  6 

^"pft  ^4TM>it«i«4slMo 

III. 

iii 

.26 

I. 

iii 

.25 

£'<RdTdd;Vr5d 

I 

.  i 

8 

BRAHMA  SUTRAS 

According  to  Sri  Shankara 
by  Swami  Vireswarananda 

Contains  the  Sutras  (555)  in  Devanagari  characters,  word-for- 
word  English  rendering  followed  by  a  running  translation 
together  with  exhaustive  notes  based  on  the  commentary  by  Sri 
Shankaracharya  and  the  glosses  of  later  scholars  on  his 
commentary. 

Pp .  495 + liv  Rs.  1 00 

BRAHMA  SUTRAS 

According  to  Sri  Ramanuja 
by  Swamis  Vireswarananda  and  Adidevananda 

Sri  Ramanuja,  taking  these  Sutras  to  be  544  in  number, 
elucidated  them  in  his  famous  commentary,  Sri  Bhashya,  from  a 
theistic  standpoint.  The  introduction  contains  a  comparative 
study  of  the  commentaries  by  Shankara,  Ramanuja,  Vallabha, 
Nimbarka,  and  Madhva.  The  book  contains  the  text  in 
Devanagari,  English  translation  with  extensive  explanatory 
notes  based  on  Ramanuja’s  commentary  on  Brahma  Sutras,  as 
well  as  his  other  works,  Vedantasara  and  Vedantadipa,  and  later 
glosses  on  his  writings. 

Pp.  512+xxiv 


Rs.  100 


STRenGTH  15  LIFE 


www.advaitaashrama.orq 


Rs.  200 

